ber. who's there?fran. nay, answer me: stand and unfold yourself.ber. long live the king.fran. bernardo?ber. he.fran. you come most carefully upon your hour.ber. 'tis now struck twelve, get thee to bed, francisco.fran. for this relief, much thanks: 'tis bitter cold, and i am sick at heart.ber. have you had quiet guard?fran. not a mouse stirring.ber. well, goodnight.if you do meet horatio and marcellus,the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.fran. i think i hear them. stand; who's there?hor. friends to this ground.mar. and liegemen to the dane.fran. give you goodnight.mar. oh farewel, honest soldier; who hath reliev'd you?fran. bernardo has my place: give you goodnight.mar. holla, bernardo.ber. say, what is horatio there?hor. a piece of him.ber. welcome horatio, welcome good marcellus.mar. what, has this thing appear'd again tonight?ber. i have seen nothing.mar. horatio says, 'tis but our phantasie,and will not let belief take hold of him,touching this dreaded sight, 'twice seen of us;therefore i have intreated him alongwith us, to watch the minutes of this night,that if again this apparition come,he may approve our eyes, and speak to it.hor. tush, tush, 'twill not appear.ber. sit down a while,and let us once again assail your ears,that are so fortified against our story,what we have two nights seen.hor. well, sit we down,and let us hear bernardo speak of this.ber. last night of all,when yon same star, that's westward from the pole,had made his course t'illume that part of heav'nwhere now it burns, marcellus and my self,the bell then beating one——mar. peace, break thee off;look where it comes again.ber. in the same figure, like the king that's dead.mar. thou art a scholar, speak to it, horatio.ber. looks it not like the king? mark it, horatio.hor. most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.ber. it would be spoke to.mar. speak to it, horatio.hor. what art thou that usurp'st this time of night,together with that fair and warlike form,in which the majesty of buried denmarkdid sometime march? by heav'n i charge thee speak.mar. it is offended.ber. see! it stalks away.hor. stay; speak; i charge thee, speak. mar. 'tis gone, and will not answer.ber. how now, horatio? you tremble and look pale.is not this something more than phantasie?what think you of it?hor. before my god, i might not this believe,without the sensible and true avouchof mine own eyes.mar. is it not like the king?hor. as thou art to thyself.such was the very armour he had on,when he th' ambitious norway combated;so frown'd he once, when in an angry parle,he smote the sleaded a polack on the ice.'tis strange mar. thus twice before, and just at this dead hour,with martial stalk, hath he gone by our watch.hor. in what particular thought to work, i know not:but in the gross and scope of my opinion,this bodes some strange eruption to our state.mar. good now sit down, and tell me, he that knows,why this same strict and most observant watchso nightly toils the subjects of the land?and why such daily cast of brazen cannon,and foreign mart for implements of war?why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task:does not divide the sunday from the week?what might be toward, that this sweaty hastedoth make the night joint labourer with the day:who is't that can inform me?hor. that can i,at least the whisper goes so. our last king,whose image even but now appear'd to us,was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway,(thereto prick't on by a most emulate pride)dar'd to the fight. in which, our valiant hamlet,(for so this side of our known world esteem'd him)did slay this fortinbras: who by seal'd compact,well ratified by law and heraldry,did forfeit (with his life) all those his landswhich he stood seiz'd of to the conqueror:against the which, a moiety competentwas gaged by our king; which had returnto the inheritance of fortinbras,had he been vanquisher, as by that covenantand carriage of the articles design'd,his fell to hamlet. now young fortinbras,of unimproved mettle hot and full,hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,shark'd up a list of landless resolutes,for food and diet, to some enterprizethat hath a stomach in't: which is no other,and it doth well appear unto our state,but to recover of us by strong handand terms compulsative, those foresaid landsso by his father lost: and this, i take it,is the main motive of our preparations,the source of this our watch, and the chief headof this posthaste and romage in the land.ber. i think it be no other, but even so:well may it sort that this portentous figurecomes armed through our watch so like the king,that was and is the question of these wars.hor. a mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.in the most high and †palmy state of rome,a little ere the mightiest julius fell,the graves stood tenantless, the sheeted deaddid squeak and gibber in the roman streets;stars shone with trains of fire, dews of blood fell;disasters veil'd the sun, and the moist starupon whose influence neptune's empire stands,was sick almost to doom'sday with eclipse.and even the like prescure of fierce events,as harbingers preceding still the fates,and prologue to the omen coming on,have heav'n and earth together demonstratedunto our climatures and countrymen. but soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!i'll cross it, though it blast me. stay, illusion!if thou hast any sound, or use of voice,speak to me.if there be any good thing to be done,that may to thee do ease, and grace to me;speak to me.if thou art privy to thy country's fate,which happily foreknowing may avoid,oh speak! ________or, if thou hast uphoarded in thy lifeextorted treasure in the womb of earth,for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,speak of it. stay, and speak—stop it, marcellus—mar. shall i strike at it with my partisan?hor. do, if it will not stand.ber. 'tis here ________hor. 'tis here ________mer. 'tis gone.we do it wrong, being so majestical,to offer it the show of violence;for it is as the air, invulnerable,and our vain blows, malicious mockery.ber. it was about to speak, when the cock crew.hor. and then it started like a guilty thingupon a fearful summons. i have heard,the cock that is the trumpet to the morn,doth with his lofty and shrillsounding throatawake the god of day; and at his warning,whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,th'extravagant and erring spirit hiesto his confine. and of the truth herein,this present object made probation.mar. it faded on the crowing of the cock.some say, that ever 'gainst that season comeswherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,the bird of dawning singeth all night long:and then, they say, no spirit walks abroad,the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,no fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm;so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.hor. so have i heard, and do in part believe it.but look, the morn in russet mantle clad,walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill;break we our watch up, and by my advicelet us impart what we have seen tonightunto young hamlet. for upon my life,this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him:do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?mar. let's do't, i pray, and i this morning knowwhere we shall find him most conveniently.king. though yet of hamlet our dear brother's deaththe memory be green; and that it fittedto bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdomto be contracted in one brow of woe;yet so far hath discretion fought with nature,that we with wisest sorrow think on him,together with remembrance of our selves.therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,th' imperial jointress of this warlike state,have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy,with one auspicious, and one dropping eye,with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage;in equal scale weighing delight and dole,taken to wife. nor have we herein barr'dyour better wisdoms, which have freely gonewith this affair along, (for all, our thanks.)now follows, that you know, young fortinbras,holding a weak supposal of our worth;or thinking by our late dear brother's deathour state to be disjoint and out of frame;colleagued with this dream of his advantage;he hath fail'd not to pester us with message,importing the surrender of those landslost by his father, by all bands of lawto our most valiant brother. so much for him.now for our self, and for this time of meeting:thus much the business is. we have here writto norway, uncle of young fortinbras,who impotent and bedrid, scarcely hearsof this his nephew's purpose, to suppresshis further gate herein; in that the levies,the lists, and full proportions are all madeout of his subjects: and we here dispatchyou, good cornelius, and you voltimand,for bearers of this greeting to old norway;giving to you no further personal powerof treaty with the king, more than the scopewhich these dilated articles allow.farewel, and let your haste commend your duty.vol. in that, and all things, will we shew our duty.king. we doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.and now laertes, what's the news with you?you told us of some suit. what is't, laertes?you cannot speak of reason to the dane,and lose your voice. what would'st thou beg, laertes;that shall not be my offer, not thy asking?the head is not more native to the heart,the hand more instrumental to the mouth,than is the throne of denmark to thy father.what wouldst thou have, laertes?laer. my dread lord,your leave and favour to return to france;from whence, though willingly i came to denmarkto shew my duty in your coronation;yet now i must confess, that duty done,my thoughts and wishes bend again tow'rd france:and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.king. have you your father's leave? what says polonius?pol. he hath, my lord, by labour some petition,wrung from me my slow leave; and at the lastupon his will i seal'd my hard consent.i do beseech you give him leave to go.king. take thy fair hour, laertes, time be thine,and thy best graces; spend it at thy will.but now, my cousin hamlet, and my son ham. a little more than kin, and less than kind.king. how is it that the clouds still hang on you?ham. not so my lord, i am too much i' th' sun.queen. good hamlet cast thy nighted colour off,and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark.do not, for ever, with thy veiled lids,seek for thy noble father in the dust;thou know'st 'tis common, all that live must die,passing through nature to eternity.ham. ay, madam, it is common.queen. if it be;why seems it so particular with thee?ham. seems, madam? nay, it is; i know not seems:'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,nor customary suits of solemn black,nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,no, nor the fruitful river in the eye,nor the dejected 'haviour of the visage,together with all forms, moods, shows of grief,that can denote me truly. these may seem,for they are actions that a man might play;but i have that within, which passeth show:these, but the trappings, and the suits of woe.king. 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature,to give these mourning duties to your father:but you must know, your father lost a father;that father his, and the surviver boundin filial obligation, for some termto do obsequious sorrow. but to perseverein obstinate condolement, is a courseof impious stubbornness, unmanly grief.it shows a will most incorrect to heav'n,a heart unfortify'd, a mind impatient,an understanding simple, and unschool'd:for what we know must be, and is as commonas any the most vulgar thing to sense,why should we, in our peevish opposition,take it to heart? fie! 'tis a fault to heav'n,a fault against the dead, a fault to nature,to reason most absurd, whose common themeis death of fathers, and who still hath cry'd,from the first corse, 'till he that died today,"this must be so." we pray you throw to earththis unprevailing woe, and think of usas of a father: for let the world take note,you are the most immediate to our throne,and with no less nobility of love,than that which dearest father bears his son,do i impart tow'rd you. for your intentin going back to school to wittenberg,it is most retrograde to our desire:and we beseech you, bend you to remainhere in the cheer and comfort of our eye,our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.queen. let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet:i pr'ythee stay with us, go not to wittenberg.ham. i shall in all my best obey you, madam.king. why 'tis a loving, and a fair reply,be as our self in denmark. madam, come,this gentle and unforc'd accord of hamletsits smiling to my heart, in grace whereofno jocund health that denmark drinks today,but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell;and the king's rowse the heav'n shall bruit againrespeaking earthly thunder. come away.ham. oh that this tootoo solid flesh would melt,thaw, and resolve it self into a dew;or that the everlasting had not fixthis canon 'gainst selfslaughter. oh god! oh god!how weary, stale, flat, and unprofitableseem to me all the uses of this world?fie on't! oh fie! 'tis an unweeded gardenthat grows to seed; things rank, and gross in naturepossess it, merely that it should come thus.but two months dead! nay, not so much; not two,—so excellent a king, that was, to this,hyperion to a satyr: so loving to my mother,that he permitted not the winds of heav'nvisit her face too roughly. heav'n and earth!must i remember?—why, he would hang on him,as if increase of appetite had grownby what it fed on; yet within a month? ——let me not think—frailty, thy name is woman!a little month! ——or e'er those shoes were oldwith which she follow'd my poor father's body,like niobe, all tears —— why she, ev'n she, ————oh heav'n! a beast that wants discourse of reasonwould have mourn'd longer—married with mine uncle,my father's brother; no more like my father,than i to hercules. within a month! ——ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears,had left the flushing in her gauled eyes,she married. oh most wicked speed, to postwith such dexterity to incestuous sheets!it is not, nor it cannot come to good.but break, my heart, for i must hold my tongue.hor. hail to your lordship.ham. i am glad to see you well,horatio? or i do forget my self?hor. the same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.ham. sir, my good friend, i'll change that name with you;and what make you from wittenberg, horatio?marcellus! —————mar. my good lord! ————ham. i am very glad to see you; good even, sir.but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?hor. a truant disposition, good my lord.ham. i would not hear your enemy say so;nor shall you do mine ear that violence,to make it truster of your own reportagainst yourself. i know you are no truant;but what is your affair in elsinore?we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.hor. my lord, i came to see your father's funeral.ham. i pr'ythee do not mock me, fellowstudent;i think it was to see my mother's wedding.hor. indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.ham. thrift, thrift, horatio: the funeral bak'd meatsdid coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.would i had met my dearest foe in heav'n,or ever i had seen that day, horatio.my father —— methinks i see my father.hor. oh where, my lord?ham. in my mind's eye, horatio.hor. i saw him once, he was a goodly king.ham. he was a man, take him for all in all,i shall not look upon his like again.hor. my lord, i think i saw him yesternight.ham. saw! who?hor. my lord, the king your father.ham. the king my father!hor. season your admiration for a whilewith an attentive ear; till i deliverupon the witness of these gentlemen,this marvel to you.ham. for heaven's love, let me hear.hor. two nights together had these gentlemen,marcellus and bernardo, on their watch,in the dead waste and middle of the night,been thus encountered. a figure like your father,arm'd at all points exactly, capapie,appears before them, and with solemn marchgoes slow and stately by them; thrice he walk'd,by their opprest and fearsurprized eyes,within his truncheon's length; whilst they (distill'dalmost to jelly with the act of fear)stand dumb, and speak not to him. this to mein dreadful secrecy impart they did,and i with them the third night kept the watch,where as they had deliver'd both in time,form of the thing, each word made true and good,the apparition comes. i knew your father:these hands are not more like.ham. but where was this?hor. my lord, upon the platform where we watcht.ham. did you not speak to it?hor. my lord, i did;but answer made it none; yet once methoughtit lifted up its head, and did addressitself to motion, like as it would speak:but even then the morning cock crew loud;and at the sound it shrunk in haste away,and vanished from our sight.ham. 'tis very strange.hor. as i do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;and we did think it writ down in our dutyto let you know of it.ham. indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.hold you the watch tonight?both. we do, my lord.ham. arm'd, say you?both. arm'd, my lord.ham. from top to toe?both. my lord, from head to foot.ham. then saw you not his face?hor. oh yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.ham. what, look'd he frowningly?hor. a count'nance more in sorrow than in anger.ham. pale, or red?hor. nay, very pale.ham. and fixt his eyes upon you?hor. most constantly.ham. i would i had been there.hor. it would have much amaz'd you.ham. very like; staid it long?hor. while one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.all. longer, longer.hor. not when i saw't.ham. his beard was grisly?hor. it was, as i have seen it in his life,a sable silver'd.ham. i'll watch tonight; perchance 'twill walk again.hor. i warrant you it will.ham. if it assume my noble father's person,i'll speak to it, tho' hell itself should gapeand bid me hold my peace. i pray you all,if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,let it be treble in your silence still:and whatsoever shall befall tonight,give it an understanding, but no tongue;i will requite your loves: so, fare ye well.upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelvei'll visit you.all. our duty to your honour.ham. your love, as mine to you: farewell.my father's spirit in arms! all is not well;i doubt some foul play: would the night were come;'till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,(tho' all the earth o'erwhelm them) to mens eyes.laer. my necessaries are embark'd, farewell;and sister, as the winds give benefit,and convoy is assistant; do not sleep,but let me hear from you.oph. do you doubt that?laer. for hamlet, and the trifling of his favours,hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,a violet in the youth of primy nature,forward, not permanent, tho' sweet, not lasting,the perfume, and suppliance of a minute;no more.oph. no more but so?laer. think it no more:for nature crescent does not grow alone,in thews and bulk; but as his temple waxes,the inward service of the mind and soulgrows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now,and now no soil nor cautel doth besmerchthe virtue of his will: but you must fear,his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own:for he himself is subject to his birth;he may not, as unvalued persons do,carve for himself; for on his choice dependsthe sanctity and health of the whole state.and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'dunto the voice and yielding of that bodywhereof he's head. then if he says he loves you,it fits your wisdom so far to believe it,as he in his peculiar act and placemay give his saying deed; which is no further,than the main voice of denmark goes withal.then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,if with too credent ear you list his songs,or lose your heart; or your chaste treasure opento his unmaster'd importunity.fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,and keep within the rear of your affection,out of the shot and danger of desire.the chariest maid is prodigal enough,if she unmask her beauty to the moon:virtue itself scapes not calumnious strokes,the canker galls the infants of the spring,too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,and in the morn and liquid dew of youthcontagious blastments are most imminent.be wary then, best safety lies in fear;youth to itself rebels, though none else near.oph. i shall th' effects of this good lesson keep;as watchman to my heart. but good my brother,do not, as some ungracious pastors do,shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n;whilst like a puff'd and careless libertine,himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,and recks not his own reed.laer. oh, fear me not.i stay too long; —— but here my father comes:a double blessing is a double grace;occasion smiles upon a second leave.pol. yet here, laertes! get aboard for shame,the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,and you are staid for there. my blessing with you;and these few precepts in thy memorysee thou character. give thy thoughts no tongue,nor any unproportion’d thought his act:be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar;the friends thou hast, and their adoption try'd,grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel:but do not dull thy palm with entertainmentof each newhatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. bewareof entrance to a quarrel: but being in,bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.give ev'ry man thine ear; but few thy voice.take each man’s censure; but reserve thy judgment.costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,but not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy:for the apparel oft proclaims the man,and they in france of the best rank and stationare most select and generous, chief in that.neither a borrower, nor a lender be;for loan oft loses both it self and friend:a borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.this above all; to thine own self be true;and it must follow, as the night the day,thou canst not then be false to any man.farewell; my blessing season this in thee!laer. most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.pol. the time invites you, go, your servants tend.laer. farewell ophilia, and remember wellwhat i have said.oph. 'tis in my mem'ry lockt,and you your self shall keep the key of it.laer. farewel.pol. what is't, ophelia, he said to you?oph. so please you, something touching the lord hamlet.pol. marry, well bethought!'tis told me he hath very oft of lategiven private time to you; and you yourselfhave of your audience been most free and bounteous;if it be so, as so 'tis put on me,and that in way of caution, i must tell you,you do not understand yourself so clearly;as it behoves my daughter, and your honour.what is between you? give me up the truth.oph. he hath, my lord, of late, made many tendersof his affection to me.pol. affection! puh! you speak like a green girl,unfitted in such perilous circumstance.do you believe his tenders, as you call them?oph. i do not know, my lord, what i should think.pol. marry i'll teach you; think yourself a baby,that you have ta'en his tenders for true pay,which are not sterling. tender yourself more dearly;or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,)wronging it thus, you'll tender me a fool.oph. my lord, he hath importun’d me with love,in honourable fashion.pol. ay, fashion you may call't: go to, go to.oph. and hath giv’n count'nance to his speech, my lord,with almost all the holy vows of heaven.pol. ay, springs to catch woodcocks. i do knowwhen the blood burns, how prodigal the soullends the tongue vows. these blazes, oh my daughter,giving more light than heat, extinct in both,ev'n in their promise as it is a making,you must not take for fire. from this time,be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence,set your intreatments at a higher rate,than a command to parley. for lord hamlet,believe so much in him, that he is young;and with a larger tether may he walk,than may be given you. in few, ophelia,do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,not of that die which their investments show,but mere implorers of unholy suits,breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,the better to beguile. this is for all:i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,have you so slander any moment's leisure,as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.look to't, i charge you; come your way.oph. i shall obey, my lord.ham. the air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.hor. it is a nipping and an eager air.ham. what hour now?hor. i think it lacks of twelve.mar. no, it is struck.hor. i heard it not: it then draws near the seasonwherein the spirit held his wont to walk.what does this mean, my lord?ham. the king doth wake tonight, and takes his rouse,keeps wassail, and the swaggering upstart reels;and as he drains his draughts of rhenish down,the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray outthe triumph of his pledge.hor. is it a custom?ham. ay marry is't:but to my mind, though i am native hereand to the manner born, it is a custommore honour'd in the breach, than the observance.hor. look, my lord, it comes!ham. angels and ministers of grace defend us!be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd,bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from hell,be thy intents wicked or charitable,thou com'st in such a questionable shape,that i will speak to thee. i'll call thee hamlet,king, father, royal dane: oh answer me.these 21 lines following are in the first edition, but in some editions since left out, perhaps as being thought too verbose, but certainly shakespeare's.this heavyheaded revel, east and west,makes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other nations;they clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrasesoil our addition; and indeed it takesfrom our achievements, though perform'd at height,the pith and marrow of our attribute.so oft it chances in particular men,that for some vicious mole of nature in them;as in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,since nature cannot chuse his origin)by the o'ergrowth of some complexion,oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason;or by some habit, that too much o'erleavensthe form of plausive manners; that these mencarrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,(being nature's livery, or fortune's scar)their virtues else, be they as pure as grace,as infinite as man may undergo,shall in the general censure take corruptionfrom that particular fault.let me not burst in ignorance; but tellwhy thy canoniz'd bones hearsed in death,have burst their ceraments? why the sepulcher,wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws,to cast thee up again? what may this mean?that thou dead coarse again in compleat steelrevisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,making night hideous: and us fools of natureso horridly to shake our dispositionwith thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?hor. it beckons you to go away with it,as if it some impartnent did desireto you alone.mar. look with what courteous actionit waves you to a more removed ground:but do not go with it.hor. no, by no means.ham. it will not speak; then i will follow it.hor. do not, my lord.ham. why, what should be the fear?i do not set my life at a pin's fee;and for my soul, what can it do to that?being a thing immortal as it self.it waves me forth again. _______ i'll follow it _______hor. what if it tempt you tow'rd the flood, my lord?or to the dreadful summit of the cliff,that beetles o'er his base into the sea;and there assume some other horrible form,which might deprive your sov'reignty of reason;and draw you into madness? think of it.the very place puts toys of desperation,without more motive, into ev'ry brain,that looks so many fadoms to the sea;and hears it roar beneath.ham. it waves me still: go on, i'll follow thee—mar. you shall not go, my lord.ham. hold off your hand.hor. be rul'd, you shall not go.ham. my fate cries out,and makes each petty artery in this bodyas hardy as the nemean lion's nerve:still am i call'd: unhand me, gentlemen——by heav'n i'll make a ghost of him that lets me——i say away——go on——i'll follow thee——hor. he waxes desp'rate with imagination.mar. let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him.hor. have after. to what issue will this come?mar. something is rotten in the state of denmark.hor. heav'n will direct it.mar. nay, let's follow him.ham. where wilt thou lead me? speak; i'll go no further.ghost. mark me.ham. i will.ghost. my hour is almost come,when i to sulphurous and tormenting flamesmust render up myself.ham. alas poor ghost!ghost. pity me not, but lend thy serious hearingto what i shall unfold.ham. speak, i am bound to hear.ghost. so art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.ham. what?ghost. i am thy father's spirit;doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,and for the day, confin'd to fast in fires;'till the foul crimes done in my days of natureare burnt and purg'd away. but that i am forbidto tell the secrets of my prisonhouse.i could a tale unfold, whose lightest wordwould harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,thy knotty and combined locks to part,and each particular hair to stand on endlike quills upon the fretful porcupine:but this eternal blazon must not beto ears of flesh and blood; list, list, oh list!if thou didst ever thy dear father love ——ham. oh heav'n!ghost. revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.ham. murther?ghost. murther most foul, as in the best it is;but this most foul, strange, and unnatural.ham. haste me to know, what i with wings as swiftas meditation or the thoughts of love,may sweep to my revenge.ghost. i find thee apt;and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weedthat rots itself in ease on lethe's wharf,wouldst thou not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear:'tis given out, that sleeping in my orchard,a serpent stung me. the whole ear of denmarkis by a forged process of my deathrankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,the serpent that did sting thy father's lifenow wears his crown.ham. oh my prophetick soul! my uncle?ghost. ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,with witchcraft of his wit, with trait'rous gifts,(oh wicked wit, and gifts that have the powerso to seduce!) won to his shameful lustthe will of my most seeming virtuous queen.oh hamlet, what a falling off was there!from me, whose love was of that dignity,that it went hand in hand ev'n with the vowi made to her in marriage; and to declineupon a wretch, whose natural gifts were poorto those of mine!but virtue, as it never will be mov'd,though lewdness court it in a shape of heav'n's,so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,will sate itself in a celestial bed,and prey on garbage ————but soft, methinks i scent the morning air ————brief let me be; sleeping within mine orchard,my custom always in the afternoon,upon my secure hour thy uncle stolewith juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,and in the porches of mine ears did pourthe leperous distilment; whose effectholds such an enmity with blood of man,that swift as quicksilver it courses throughthe natural gates and allies of the body;and with a sudden vigour it doth possetand curd, like eager droppings into milk,the thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine,and a most instant tetter bark'd about,most lazarlike, with vile and loathsome crustall my smooth body.thus was i sleeping, by a brother's hand,of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch'd;cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,†unhouzled, †unanointed, †unaneled;no reck'ning made, but sent to my accountwith all my imperfections on my head.oh horrible! oh horrible! most horrible!if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;let not the royal bed of denmark bea couch for luxury and damned incest.but howsoever thou pursu'st this act,taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contriveagainst thy mother ought; leave her to heav'n;and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,to prick and sting her. fare thee well at once!the glowworm shews the matin to be near,and 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.adieu, adieu, adieu; remember me. ham. oh all you host of heav'n! o earth! what else?and shall i couple hell? oh hold my heart ——and you my sinews, grow not instant old;but bear me stiffly up; remember thee ——ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seatin this distracted globe: remember thee ————yea, from the table of my memoryi'll wipe away all trivial fond records,all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,that youth and observation copied there;and thy commandment all alone shall livewithin the book and volume of my brain,unmixt with baser matter. yes, by heav'n:oh most pernicious woman!oh villain, villain, smiling damned villain!my tables, —— meet it is i set it down,that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;at least i'm sure it may be so in denmark.so uncle, there you are; now to my word;it is: adieu, adieu, remember me:i've sworn it —— ——hor. my lord, my lord.mar. lord hamlet.hor. heav'n secure him.mar. so be it.hor. illo, ho, ho, my lord.ham. hillo, ho, ho, boy; come boy, come.mar. how is't, my noble lord?hor. what news, my lord?ham. oh wonderful!hor. good my lord, tell it.ham. no, you'll reveal it.hor. not i, my lord, by heav'n.mar. nor i, my lord.ham. how say you then, would heart of man once think it?but you'll be secret? both. ay, by heav'n, my lord.ham. there's ne'er a villain dwelling in all denmark,but he is an arrant knave.hor. there needs no ghost, my lord, come from the graveto tell us this.ham. why right, you are i'th' right;and so without more circumstance at all,i hold it fit that we shake hands, and part;you as your business and desires shall point you,(for every man has business and desire,such as it is) and for my own poor part,i will go pray.hor. these are but wild and hurtling words, my lord.ham. i'm sorry they offend you, heartily;yes heartily.hor. there's no offence, my lord.ham. yes, by st. patrick, but there is, my lord,and much offence too. touching this vision here —it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:for your desire to know what is between us,o'ermaster't as you may. and now, good friends,as you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,give me one poor request.hor. what is't, my lord?ham. never make known what you have seen tonight.both. my lord, we will not.ham. nay, but swear't.hor. in faith, my lord, not i.mar. nor i, my lord, in faith.ham. upon my sword.mar. we've sworn, my lord, already.ham. indeed, upon my sword, indeed.ghost. swear.ham. ah ha boy, say'st thou so; art thou there, truepenny?come on, you hear this fellow in the celleridge.consent to swear.hor. propose the oath, my lord.ham. never speak of this that you have seen,swear by my sword.ghost. swear.ham. hic & ubique? then we'll shift our ground.come hither gentlemen,and lay your hands again upon my sword.never to speak of this which you have heard.swear by my sword.ghost. swear.ham. well said, old mole, can't work i'th' ground so fast?a worthy pioneer! once more remove, good friends.hor. oh day and night! but this is wondrous strange.ham. and therefore as a stranger give it welcome.there are more things in heav'n and earth, horatio,than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come,swear as before, never so help you mercy,how strange or odd soe'er i bear my self,(as i perchance hereafter shall think meetto put an antick disposition on)that you at such time seeing me, never shallwith arms encumbered thus, or this head shake,or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,as, well——we know——or, we could, and if we would——or, if we list to speak——or, there be, and it there might——(or such ambiguous giving out) denotethat you know aught of me. this do ye swear,so grace and mercy at your most need help you!swear.ghost. swear.ham. rest, rest, perturbed spirit. so, gentlemen,with all my love i do commend me to you;and what so poor a man as hamlet is,may do to express his love and friending to you,god willing, shall not lack; let us go in together,and still your fingers on your lips i pray.the time is out of joint; oh cursed spite,that ever i was born to set it right.nay, come, let's go together. pol. give him this money, and these notes, reynoldo.rey. i will, my lord.pol. you shall do marvellous wisely, good reynoldo,before you visit him, to make inquiryof his behaviour.rey. my lord, i did intend it.pol. marry, well said, very well said. look you, sir,enquire me first what daneskers are in paris;and how, and who, what means, and where they keep,what company, at what expense? and findingby this encompassment and drift of question,that they do know my son; come you more near;then your particular demands will touch it,take you, as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,as thus———i know his father and his friends,and in part him———do you mark this, reynoldo?rey. ay, very well, my lord.pol. and in part him———but you may say———not well;but if't be he i mean, he's very wild;addicted so and so———and there put on himwhat forgeries you please; marry, none so rank,as may dishonour him; take heed of that;but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips,as are companions noted and most knownto youth and liberty.rey. as gaming, my lord———pol. ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,quarrelling, drabbing —— you may go so far.rey. my lord, that would dishonour him.pol. faith no, as you may season it in the charge;you must not put another scandal on him,that he is open to incontinency;that's not my meaning; but breathe his faults soquaintly,that they may seem the taints of liberty;the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,a savageness in unreclaimed blood.of general assault.rey. but, my good lord———pol. wherefore should you do this?rey. ay, my lord, i would know that.pol. marry, sir, here's my drift,and i believe it is a fetch of wit.you laying these slight sallies on my son,as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,mark you your party in converse; he you would sound,having ever seen in the prenominate crimes,the youth you speak of guilty, be assur'dhe closes with you in this consequence;good sir, or so, or friend, or gentleman,(according to the phrase or the addition,of man and country.)rey. very good, my lord.pol. and then, sir, does he this?he does —— what was i about to say?i was about to say something: where did i leave?rey. at closes in the consequence.pol. at closes in the consequence —— ay marry,he closes thus. i know the gentleman,i saw him yesterday, or t'other day,or then, with such and such, and as you say,there was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse,there falling out at tennis; or perchance,i saw him enter such a house of sale,videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. see you now;your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;and thus do we of wisdom and of reach,with windlaces, and with assays of bias,by indirections find directions out:so by my former lecture and adviceshall you my son; you have me, have you not?rey. my lord, i have.pol. god b'w' you; fare you well.rey. good my lord.pol. observe his inclination in yourself.rey. i shall, my lord.pol. and let him ply his musick.rey. well, my lord.pol. farewel. how now ophelia, what's the matter?oph. alas my lord, i have been so affrighted!pol. with what, in the name of heav'n?oph. my lord, as i was sewing in my closet,lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,no hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,ungarter'd, and downgyved to his ancle,pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,and with a look so piteous in purport,as if he had been loosed out of hell,to speak of horrors; thus he comes before me.pol. mad for thy love?oph. my lord, i do not know:but truly i do fear it.pol. what said he?oph. he took me by the wrist, and held me hard,then goes he to the length of all his arm;and with his other hand, thus o'er his brow,he falls to such perusal of my face,s he would draw it. long time staid he so;at last, a little shaking of his arm,and thrice his head thus waving up and down.he rais'd a sigh, so piteous and profound,that it did seem to shatter all his bulk,and end his being. then he lets me go,and with his head over his shoulder turn'd,he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,for outadoors he went without their help,and to the last, bended their light on me.pol. come, go with me, i will go seek the king:this is the very ecstasy of love,whose violent property foredoes it self,and leads the will to desperate undertakings,as oft as any passion under heav'n,that do's afflict our natures. i am sorry;what, have you giv'n him any hard words of late?oph. no, my good lord; but as you did command,i did repel his letters, and deny'dhis access to me.pol. that hath made him mad.i'm sorry that with better heed and judgmenti had not quoted him. i fear'd he trifl'dand meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy:it seems it is as proper to our age,to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions,as it is common for the younger sortto lack discretion. come, go we to the king,this must be known, which being kept close, might movemore grief to hide, than hate to utter love.king. welcome dear rosincrosse and guildenstern,moreover, that we much did long to see you,the need we have to use you did provokeour hasty sending. something have you heardof hamlet's transformation; so i call it,since not th' exterior, nor the inward manresembles that it was. what it should bemore than his father's death, that thus hath put himso much from th' understanding of himself,i cannot dream of. i entreat you both,that being of so young days brought up with him,and since so neighbour'd to his youth and humour,that you vouchsafe your rest here in our courtsome little time, so by your companiesto draw him on to pleasures, and to gatherso much as from occasions you may glean,if ought, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,that open'd lies within our remedy.queen. good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you;and sure i am, two men there are not living,to whom he more adheres. if it will please youto shew us so much gentry and good will,as to extend your time with us a while,for the supply and profit of our hope,your visitation shall receive such thanksas fits a king's remembrance.ros. both your majestiesmight by the sovereign power you have of us,put your dread pleasures more into commandthan to entreaty.guil. but wand here give up our selves in the full bent,to lay our service freely at your feet.king. thanks, rosincrosse and gentle guildenstern.queen. thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosincrosse;and i beseech you instantly to visitmy toomuch changed son. go some of ye,and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.guil. heavens make our presence and our practicespleasant and helpful to him!pol. the ambassadors from norway, my good lord,are joyfully returned.king. thou still hast been the father of good news.pol. have i, my lord? assure you, my good liege,i hold my duty, as i hold my soul,both to my god, and to my gracious king;and i do think, or else this brain of minehunts not the trail of policy so sureas i have used to do, that i have foundthe very cause of hamlet's lunacy.king. o, speak of that; that do i long to hear.pol. give first admittance to the ambassadors.my news shall be the fruit to that great feast.king. thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.he tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath foundthe head and source of all your son's distemper.queen. i doubt it is no other but the main,his father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage.king. well, we shall sist him. welcome, my goodfriends!say voltimand, what from our brother norway?volt. most fair return of greetings, and desires.upon our first, he sent out to suppresshis nephew's levies, which to him appear'dto be a preparation 'gainst the polack:but better look't into, he truly foundit was against your highness. whereat griev'd,that so his sickness, age, and impotencewas falsely borne in hand, sends out arrestson fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,receives rebuke from norway; and in fine,makes vow before his uncle never moreto give th' assay of arms against your majesty.whereon old norway, overcome with joy,gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,and his commission to employ those soldiers,so levied as before, against the polack:with an entreaty herein further shewn,that it might please you to give quiet passthrough your dominions for this enterprizeon such regards of safety and allowance,as herein are set down.king. it likes us well;and at our more consider'd time we'll read,answer, and think upon this business.meantime we thank you, for your welltook labour.go to your rest, at night we'll feast together.most welcome home.pol. this business is well ended.my liege and madam, to expostulatewhat majesty should be, what duty is,why day is day, night night, and time is time,were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.therefore, since brevity's the soul of wit,and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,i will be brief: your noble son is mad.mad call i it; for to define true madness,what is't, but to be nothing else but mad?queen. more matter, with less art.pol. madam, i swear i use no art at all;that he is mad 'tis true; 'tis true, 'tis pity;and pity, it is true; a foolish figure,but farewell it; for i will use no art.mad let us grant him then; and now remainsthat we find out the cause of this effect,or rather say, the cause of this defect,for this effect defective, comes by cause,thus it remains, and the remainder thus— perpend:i have a daughter; have, whilst she is mine,who in her duty and obedience, mark,hath given me this; now gather, and surmise.to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia.—that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, beautified is a vile phrase; but you shall hear—these to her excellent white bosom, these—queen. came this from hamlet to her?pol. good madam stay a while, i will be faithful.doubt thou, the stars are fire,doubt, that the sun doth move;doubt truth to be a liar,but never doubt, i love.oh dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers; i have not art to reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, oh most best, believe it. adieu.thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, hamlet.this in obedience hath my daughter shown me:and more above, hath his solicitings,as they fell out by time, by means, and place,all given to mine ear.king. but how hath she received his love?pol. what do you think of me?king. as of a man, faithful and honourable.pol. i would fain prove so. but what might you think;when i had seen his hot love on the wing,(as i perceived it, i must tell you that,before my daughter told me,) what might you,or my dear majesty your queen here, think?if i had play'd the desk or tablebook,or given my heart working, mute and dumb,or look'd upon this love with idle sight,what might you think? no, i went round to work;and my young mistress thus i did bespeak;lord hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere,this must not be; and then, i precepts gave her,that she should lock her self from his resort,admit no messengers, receive no tokens:which done, she took the fruits of my advice,and he repulsed, a short tale to make,fell to a sadness, then into a fast,thence to a watching, thence into a weakness,thence to a lightness, and by this declensioninto the madness wherein now he raves,and all we wail for.king. do you think this?queen. it may be very likely.pol. hath there been such a time, i'd fain know that,that i have positively said, 'tis so,when it proved otherwise?king. not that i know.pol. take this from this, if this be otherwise;if circumstances lead me, i will findwhere truth is hid, though it were hid indeedwithin the center.king. how may we try it further?pol. you know sometimes he walks four hours together,here in the lobby.queen. so he does indeed.pol. at such a time i'll loose my daughter to him,be you and i behind an arras then,mark the encounter: if he love her not,and be not from his reason fal'n thereon,let me be no assistant for a state,but keep a farm and carters.king. we will try it.queen. but looks where, sadly, the poor wretch comesreading.pol. away, i do beseech you, both away.i’ll board him presently.oh give me leav. how does my good lord hamlet?ham. well, godamercy.pol. do you know me, my lord.ham. excellent well, y’are a fishmonger?pol. not i, my lord.ham. then i would you were so honest a man.pol. honest, my lord?ham. ay, sir; to be honest as this world goes, isis to be one pick’d out of ten thousand.pol. that’s very true, my lorld.ham. for if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog,being a good kissing carrion—have you a daughter?pol. i have, my lord.ham. let her not walk i’th’sun; conception is ablessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. friend,look too’t.pol. how say you by that? still harping on mydaughter–––yet he knew me not at first; he said i was a fishmonger.he is far gone; and truly in my youth,i suffered much extremity for love;very near this. i’ll speak to him again.what do you read, my lord?ham. words, words, words.pol. what is the matter, my lord?ham. between whom?pol. i mean the matter that you read, my lord.ham. slanders, sir: for the satyrical slave says here,that old men have gray beards; that their faces arewrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber, and plumtree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit,together with most weak hams. all which, sir, tho' i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it not honesty to have it thus set down : for yourself, sir, shall be as old asiam, if like a crab you could go backward.pol. though this be madness, yet there's method in't:will you walk out of the air, my lord?ham. into my grave?pol. indeed that is out o'th' air:how pregnant (sometimes) his replies are?a happiness that often madness hits on,which sanity and reason could not beso prosperously deliver'd of. i'll leave him,and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.my honourable lord, i will most humblytake my leave of you.ham. you cannot, sir, take from me any thing that i will more willingly part withal, except my life.pol. fare you well, my lord.ham. these tedious old fools.pol. you go to seek lord hamlet; there he is.ros. god save you, sir.guild. mine honour'd lord!ros. my most dear lord!ham. my excellent good friends! how dost thouguildenstern?oh, rosincrosse, good lads! how do ye both?ros. as the indifferent children of the earth.guil. happy, in that we are not overhappy; onfortune's cap, we are not the very button.ham. nor the soals of her shoe?ros. neither, my lord.ham. then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?guil. faith, in her privates we.ham. in the secret parts of fortune? oh, most true;she is a trumpet. what news?ros. none, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.ham. then is doomsday near; but your news isnot true. † let me question more in particular: whathave you, my good friends, deserved at the hands offortune, that she sends you to prison hither?guil. prison, my lord!ham. denmark's a prison.ros. then is the world one.ham. a goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons; denmark being one o'th'worst.ros. we think not so, my lord.ham. why then, 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so:to me it is a prison.ros. why then your ambition makes it one: 'tis toonarrow for your mind.ham. oh god, i could be bounded in a nutshell,and count my self a king of infinite space; were itnot that i have bad dreams.guil. which dreams indeed are ambition; for thevery substance of the ambitious is merely the shadowof a dream.ham. a dream it self is but a shadow.ros. truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and lighta quality, that it is but a shadow's shadow.ham. then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd heroes, the beggars shadows;shall we to th' court? for by my fay, i cannot reason.both. we'll wait upon you.ham. no such matter. i will not sort you with therest of my servants: for to speak to you like an honestman, i am most dreadfully attended; but in the bearen way of friendship, what make you at elsinor?ros. to visit you, my lord; no other occasion.ham. beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks;but i thank you; and sure, dear friends, my thanks aretoo dear a halfpenny. were you not sent for? is ityour own inclining? is it a free visitation? come, dealjustly with me; come, come; nay, speak.guil. what should we say, my lord?ham. any thing but to the purpose. you weresent for; and there is a kind of confession in yourlooks, which your modesties have not craft enoughto colour. i know the good king and queen havesent for you.ros. to what end, my lord?ham. that you must teach me; but let me conjureyou by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancyof our youth, by the obligation of our everpreservedlove, and by what more dear, a better proposercould charge you withal; be even and direct with me,whether you were sent for or no?ros. what say you?ham. nay, then i have an eye of you: if you loveme, hold not off.guil. my lord, we were sent for.ham. i will tell you why; so shall my anticipationprevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the kingand queen moult no feather. i have of late, butwherefore i know not, lost all my mirth, forgone allcustom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavilywith my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth,seems to me a steril promontory; this most excellentcanopy the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament,this majestical roof fretted with golden fire,why, it appears no other thing to me, than a foul andpestilent congregation of vapours. what a piece ofwork is man! how noble in reason! how infinite infaculties! in form and moving how express and admirable!in action how like an angel! in apprehensionhow like a god! the beauty of the world, the paragonof animals! and yet to me, what is this quintessenceof dust? man delights not me; nor woman neither,though by your smiling you seem to say so.ros. my lord there was no such stuff in my thoughts.ham. why did you laugh, when i said, man delights not me?ros. to think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you; we accosted them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.ham. he that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foyle and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for't. what players are they?ros. even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.ham. how chances it they travel? their residence both in reputation and profit was better, both ways.ros. i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.ham. do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the city? are they so follow'd?ros. no indeed, they are not.ham. how comes it? do they grow rusty?ros. nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is, sir, an airy of children, little faces, that cry out on the top of question; and are most tyrannically clapt for't; these are now the fashion; and so berattle the common stages (so they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills, and dare scarce come thither.ham. what, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are they escorted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means are no better:) their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?ros. faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it no sin, to tarre them on to controversie. there was for a while no money bid h a m l e t, prince of denmark. 247for argument, unless the poet and the player went tocuffs in the question.ham. is't possible?guil. oh there has been much throwing about ofbrains.ham. do the boys carry it away?ros. ay, that they do, my lord, hercules and hisload too.ham. it is not strange; for mine uncle is king ofdenmark, and those that would make mowes at himwhile my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, anhundred ducats apiece, for his picture in little. thereis something in this more than natural, if philosophycould find it out. guil. there are the players.ham. gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore;your hands: come then, the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. let me comply withyou in this garbe, lest my extent to the players(which i tell you must shew fairly outward) shouldmore appear like entertainment than yours. you arewelcome; but my unclefather and auntmother aredeceiv'd.guil. in what, my dear lord?ham. i am but mad north, northwest: when thewind is southerly, i know a hawk from a handsaw. pol. well be with you, gentlemen.ham. hark you, guildenstern, and you too, at eachear a hearer; that great baby you see there, is notyet out of his swathing clouts.ros. haply he's the second time come to them; forthey say, an old man is twice a child.ham. i will prophesie, he comes to tell me of theplayers. mark it, you say right, sir; for on mondaymorning 'twas so indeed.pol. my lord, i have news to tell you.ham. my lord, i have news to yell you.when roscius was an actor in rome––––pol. the actors are come hither, my lord.ham. buzze. buzze.pol. upon mine honour––––ham. then came each actor on his ass–––pol. the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoralcomical, historical pastoral, scene unividable, or poem unliminted,seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light,for the law of wit, and the liberty. these are theonly men.ham. of jephta, judge of israel, what a treasurehadst thou!pol. what a treasure had he, my lord?ham. why one fair daughter, and no more,the which he loved passing well.pol. still on my daughter.ham. am i not i’th’right, old jephta?pol. if you call me jephta, my lord, i have a daughter that i love passing well.ham. nay that follows not.pol. what follows then, my lord?ham. why as by lot, god, wot––––and then youknow, it came to pas, as most like it was; the first row of the rubrick will shew you more. for lookwhere my abridgements come.y’are welcome masters, welcome all. i am glad to see thee well; welcome good friends. oh! oldfriend! thy face is valanc’d since i saw thee last:com’st thou to beard me in denmark? what myyoung lady and mistress? berlady your ladyship isnearer heaven than when i saw you last, by the altitude of a chioppine. pray god your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.—— masters, you are all welcome; we'll e'ento't like friendly falconers, fly at any thing we see;we'll have a speech straight. come, give us a tasteof your quality; come, a passionate speech.1 play. what speech, my good lord?ham. i heard thee speak me a speech once, but itwas never acted: or if it was, not above once, forthe play i remember pleas'd not the million, 'twascaviar to the general; but it was, (as i receiv'd it,and others, whose judgment in such matters cried inthe top of mine) an excellent play; well digested inthe scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning.i remember one said, there was no salt inthe lines, to make the matter savoury; nor no matterin the phrase, that might indict the author ofaffection; but call'd it, an honest method. onespeech in it i chiefly lov'd, 'twas æneas' tale to dido,and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks ofpriam's laughter. if it live in your memory, beginat this line, let me see, let me see —— the ruggedpyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast. it is not so —— itbegins with pyrrhus.the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable armsblack as his purpose, did the night resemblewhen he lay couched in the ominous horse;hath now his dread and black complexion smear'dwith heraldry more dismal; head to footnow is he total gules; horridly tricktwith blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,bak'd and impaled with the parching fires,that lend a tyrannous and damned lightto murders vile. roasted in wrath and fire,and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhusold grandsire priam seeks.pol. 'fore god, my lord, well spoken, with goodaccent, and good discretion.1 play. anon he finds him,striking too short at greeks. his antique sword,rebellious to his arm, lies where it fallsrepugnant to command; unequal match'd,pyrrhus at priam drives, in rage strikes wide;but with the whiff and wind of his fell swordth' unnerved father falls. then senseless ilium,seeming to feel this blow, with flaming topstoops to his base, and with a hideous crashtakes prisoner pyrrhus' ear. for lo, his sword,which was declining on the milky headof rev'rend priam, seem'd i'th' air to stick:so as a painted tyrant pyrrhus stood,and like a neutral to his will and matter,did nothing.but as we often see against some storm,a silence in the heav'ns, the rack stand still,the bold winds speechless, and the orb belowas hush as death: anon the dreadful thunderdoth rend the region. so after pyrrhus' pause,a rous'd vengeance sets him new awork,and never did the cyclops hammers fallon mars his armour, forg'd for proof eterne,with less remorse than pyrrhus' bleeding swordnow falls on priam.out, out, thou trumpetfortune! all you gods,in general synod take away her power:break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,and bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n,as low as to the fiends.pol. this is too long.ham. it shall to th' barber's with your beard. pr'ythee say on; he's for a jig, or a tale of bawdry, orhe sleeps. say on, come to hecuba.2 play. but who, oh who, had seen the mobledqueen?ham. the mobled queen?pol. that's good; mobled queen, is good.play. run barefoot up and down, threatening theflameswith bisson rheum; a clout upon that head,where late the diadem stood, and for a robeabout her lank and all o'erteemed loyns,a blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up.who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd:but if the gods themselves did see her then,when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sportin mincing with his sword her husband's limbs;the instant burst of clamour that she made,(unless things mortal move them not at all)would have made melt the burning eyes of heav'n,and passion in the gods.pol. look if he has not turn'd his colour, and hastears in's eyes. pr'ythee no more.ham. 'tis well, i'll have thee speak out the rest ofthis soon. good my lord, will you see the playerswell bestow'd. do ye hear, let them be well us'd;for they are the abstract, and brief chronicles of thetime. after your death, you were better have a badepitaph, than their ill report while you liv'd.pol. my lord, i will use them according to theirdesert.ham. gods bodikins man, much better. use everyman after his desert, and who shall scape whipping?use them after your own honour and dignity.the less they deserve, the more merit is in yourbounty. take them in.pol. come, sirs. ham. follow him, friends: we'll hear a play tomorrow.dost thou hear me, old friend, can youplay the murther of gonzago?play. ay, my lord.ham. we'll ha't tomorrow night. you could fora need study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines,which i would set down, and insert in't? could ye not?play. ay, my lord.ham. very well. follow that lord, and look you mock him not. my good friends, i'll leave you 'till night, you are welcome to elsinore.ros. good my lord.ham. ay so, god b' w' ye: now i am alone.oh what a rogue and peasant slave am i?is it not monstrous that this player here,but in a fiction, in a dream of passion,could force his soul so to his own conceit,that from her working, all his visage warm'd:tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,a broken voice, and his whole function suitingwith forms, to his conceit? and all for nothing?for hecuba?what's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba,that he should weep for her? what would he do,had he the motive and the cue for passionthat i have? he would drown the stage with tears,and cleave the gen'ral ear with horrid speech,make mad the guilty, and appall the free,confound the ignorant, and amaze indeedthe very faculty of eyes and ears. ———yet i say nothing; no, not for a king,upon whose property and most dear lifea damn'd defeat was made. am i a coward?who calls me villain, breaks my pate across,plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?tweaks me by th' nose, gives me the lie i' th' throat,as deep as to the lungs? who does me this?yet i should take it ——— for it cannot be,but i am pigeonliver'd, and lack gallto make oppression bitter; or ere this,i should have fatted all the region kiteswith this slave's offal. bloody, bawdy villain!remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!why what an ass am i? this is most brave,that i, the son of a dear father murdered,prompted to my revenge by heav'n and hell,must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,and fall a cursing like a very drab ——a scullion!^k —— fye upon't! foh! —— about mybrain! ——i've heard, that guilty creatures, at a play,have by the very cunning of the scenebeen struck so to the soul, that presentlythey have proclaim'd their malefactions.for murder, though it have no tongue, will speakwith most miraculous organ. i'll have these players,play something like the murther of my father,before mine uncle. i'll observe his looks,i'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench,i know my course. the spirit that i have seenmay be the devil, and the devil hath powerto assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhapsout of my weakness and my melancholy,(as he is very potent with such spirits)abuses me to damn me. i'll have groundsmore relative than this: the play's the thing,wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king.king. and can you by no drift of a conferenceget from him why he puts on this confusion,grating so harshly all his days of quiet,with turbulent and dang'rous lunacy?ros.he does confess he feels himself distracted;but from what cause he will by no means speak.guil.nor do we find him forward to be sounded;but with a crafty madness keeps aloof,when we would bring him on to some confessionof his true state.queen.did he receive you well?ros.most like a gentleman.guil.but with much forcing of his disposition.ros.niggard of question, but of our demandsmost free in his reply.queen.did you assay him to any pastime?ros.madam, it so fell out, that certain playerswe o'ertook on the way; of these we told him;and there did seem in him a kind of joyto hear of it: they are about the court,and (as i think) they have already orderthis night to play before him.pol. 'tis most true:and he beseech'd me to entreat your majestiesto hear and see the matter.king. with all my heart, and it doth much content meto hear him so inclin'd.good gentlemen, give him a further edge,and drive his purpose into these delights.ros. we shall, my lord.king. sweet gertrude, leave us too,for we have closely sent for hamlet hither,that he, as 'twere by accident, may hereaffront ophelia. her father, and my self,will so bestow ourselves, that seeing unseenwe may of their encounter frankly judge,and gather by him, as he is behaved,if't be th' afflictions of his love, or no,that thus he suffers for.queen. i shall obey you:and for my part, ophelia, i do wishthat your good beauties be the happy causeof hamlet's wildness. so i hope your virtuesmay bring him to his wonted way again,to both your honours.oph. madam, i wish it may.pol. ophelia, walk you here. gracious, so please yewe will bestow ourselves: read on this book;that shew of such an exercise may colouryour loneliness. we're oft to blame in this,'tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage,and pious action we do sugar o'erthe devil himself.king. oh 'tis too true.how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!the harlot's cheek beautied with plastering artis not more ugly to the thing that helps it,than is my deed to my most painted word.oh heavy burthen!pol. i hear him coming, let's withdraw my lord.ham. to be, or not to be? that is the question—whether 'tis nobler in the mind, to sufferthe slings and arrows of outrageous fortune;or to take arms against a sea of troubles,and by opposing end them?—to die,—to sleep—no more; and by a sleep to say we endthe heartache and the thousand natural shocksthat flesh is heir to; 'tis a consummationdevoutly to be wish'd. to die—to sleep—to sleep: perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub—for in that sleep of death what dreams may come,when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,must give us pause. there's the respectthat makes calamity of so long life.for who would bear the whips and scorns of time,th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,the pang of despis'd love, the law’s delay,the insolence of office, and the spurnsthat patient merit of th' unworthy takes;when he himself might his quietus makewith a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,to groan and sweat under a weary life?but that the dread of something after death,(that undiscover'd country, from whose bourneno traveller returns) puzzles the will,and makes us rather bear those ills we have,than fly to others that we know not of.thus conscience does make cowards of us all;and thus the native hue of resolutionis sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought;and enterprizes of great pith and moment,with this regard, their currents turn awryand lose the name of action. — soft you now,the fair ophelia? nymph, in thy oraisonsbe all my sins remembered.oph. good my lord,how does your honour for this many a day?ham. i humbly thank you; well, ————oph. my lord, i have remembrances of yours,that i have longed much to redeliver.i pray you now receive them.ham. no, i never gave you ought.oph. my honour'd lord, i know right well you did,and with them words of so sweet breath compos’d,as made the things more rich: that perfume lost,take these again; for to the noble mindrich gifts wax poor, when givers prove unkind.there, my lord.ham. ha, ha! are you honest?oph. my lord ————ham. are you fair?oph. what means your lordship?ham. that if you be honest and fair, you should admit no discourse to your beauty.oph. could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?ham. ay truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is, to a bawd; than the force of honesty can translate beauty into its likeness. this was sometimes a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. i did love you once.oph. indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.ham. you should not have believed me. for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock, but we shall relish of it. i lov’d you not.oph. i was the more deceived.ham. get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse me of such things, that it were better my mother had not born me.i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offencesat my beck, than i have thoughts to put them in,imagination to give them shape, or time to act them.what should such fellows as i do crawling between heav'n and earth? we are arrant knaves, believe none of us—go thy ways to a nunnery—where's your father?oph. at home, my lord.ham. let the doors be shut upon him, that hemay play the fool no where but in's own house.farewel.oph. oh help him, you sweet heav'ns!ham. if thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plaguefor thy dowry. be thou as chaste as ice, as pure assnow, thou shalt not escape calumny———get theeto a nunnery,——farewel——or if thou wilt needsmarry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough, what monsters you make of them———toa nunnery go——and quickly too: farewel.oph. heav'nly powers! restore him.ham. i have heard of your g painting too, wellenough: god has given you one h face, and youmake your self another. you jig, you amble, andyou lisp, and nickname god's creatures, and makeyour wantonness your ignorance. go, i'll no moreon't, it hath made me mad. i say, we will have nomore marriages. those that are married already, allbut one, shall live, the rest shall keep as they are.to a nunnery, go.oph. oh what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!the courtiers, soldiers, scholars, eye, tongue, sword!th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,the glass of fashion, and the mould of form,th' observ'd of all observers, quite, quite down!i am of ladies most deject and wretched,that suck'd the honey of his musick vows:now see that noble and most sovereign reason,like sweet bells jangled out of tune, and harsh;that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth,blasted with ecstasy. oh woe is me!thave seen what i have seen; see what i see.king. love! his affections do not that way tend,nor what he spake, tho' it lack'd form a little,was not like madness. something's in his soul,o'er which his melancholy fits on brood,and i do doubt the hatch and the disclosewill be some danger, which how to prevent,i have in quick determinationthus set it down. he shall with speed to england,for the demand of our neglected tribute:haply the seas and countries different,with variable objects, shall expelthis something settled matter in his heart;whereon his brains still beating, puts him thusfrom fashion of himself. what think you on't?pol. it shall do well. but yet do i believethe origin and commencement of this griefsprung from neglected love. how now, ophelia?you need not tell us what lord hamlet said,we heard it all. my lord, do as you please;but if you hold it fit after the play,let his queenmother all alone intreat himto shew his griefs; let her be round with him:and i'll be plac'd, so please you, in the earof all their conf'rence. if she find him not,to england send him; or confine him whereyour wisdom best shall think.king. it shall be so:madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.ham. speak the speech i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue.but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, ihad as lieve the towncrier had spoke my lines. anddo not saw the air too much with your hand thus,but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest,and, as i may say, whirlwind of your passion, youmust acquire and beget a temperance that may give itsmoothness. oh, it offends me to the soul, to heara robustious periwigpated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings: who (for the most part) are capable of nothing, but inexplicable dumb shows, and noise: icould have such a fellow whipt for o'erdoing termagant; it outherods herod. pray you avoid it.play. i warrant your honour.ham. be not too tame neither; but let your owndiscretion be your tutor. sute the action to the word,the word to the action; with this special observance,that you o'erstep not the modesty of nature; for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing;whose end both at the first and now, was and is, tohold as 'twere the mirror up to nature; to shew virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and thevery age and body of the time, his form and pressure. now this overdone, or come tardy off, tho'it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve: the censure of which one, must inyour allowance o'ersway a whole theatre of others.oh, there be players that i have seen play, and heardothers praise and that highly, (not to speak it prophane!) that neither having the accent of christians,nor the gait of christian, pagan, i or man, have so strutted and bellow'd, that i have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men, and not madethem well; they imitated humanity so abominably.play. i hope we have reform'd that indifferentlywith us.ham. oh reform it altogether. and let those thatplay your clowns, speak no more than is set downfor them: for there be of them that will themselveslaugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectatorsto laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary question of the play be then to be considered:that's villanous, and shews a most pitiful ambitionin the fool that uses it. go make you ready.how now, my lord? will the king hear this piece ofwork?pol. and the queen too, and that presently.ham. bid the players make haste. will you two help to hasten them?both. we will, my lord.ham. what ho, horatio?hor. here, sweet lord, at your service.ham. horatio, thou art e'en as just a manas e'er my conversation coap'd withal.hor. oh my dear lord——ham. nay, do not think i flatter:for what advancement may i hope from thee,that no revenue hast, but thy good spiritsto feed and cloath thee? should the poor be flatter'd?no, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee;where thrift may follow fawning. dost thou hear?since my dear soul was mistress of her choice,and could of men distinguish, her electionhath seal'd thee for her self. for thou hast beenas one, in suffering all that suffers nothing.a man, that fortune's buffets and rewardshath ta'en with equal thanks. and blest are those,whose blood and judgment are so well comingled,that they are not a pipe for fortune's fingerto sound what stop she please. give me that manthat is not passion's slave, and i will wear himin my heart's core: ay, in my heart of heart,as i do thee. —— something too much of this. ——there is a play tonight before the king,one scene of it comes near the circumstancewhich i have told thee, of my father's death;i pr'ythee, when thou seest that act afoot,ev'n with the very comment of thy soulobserve mine uncle: if his occult guiltdo not itself unkennel in one speech,it is a damned ghost that we have seen:and my imaginations are as foulas vulcan's † filthy. give him heedful note;for i mine eyes will rivet to his face,and after we will both our judgments join,to censure of his seeming.hor. well, my lord.if he steal ought the whilst this play is playing,and scape detecting, i will pay the theft,ham. they're coming to the play; i must be idle.get you a place.king. how fares our cousin hamlet?ham. excellent i'faith, of the chameleon's dish: ieat the air, promisecramm'd: you cannot feed capons so.king. i have nothing with this answer, hamlet,these words are not mine.ham. no, nor mine— now, my lord, you plaidonce i'th' university, you say?pol. that i did, my lord, and was accounted agood actor.ham. and what did you enact?pol. i did enact julius cæsar, i was kill'd i'th' capitol: brutus kill'd me.ham. it was a brute part of him, to kill so capital a calf there. be the players ready?ro. ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience.queen. come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.ham. no, good mother, here's mettle more attractive.pol. oh ho, do you mark that?ham. lady, shall i lye in your lap?oph. no, my lord.ham. do you think i meant country matters?oph. i think nothing, my lord.ham. that's a fair thought to lye between a maid'slegs.oph. what is, my lord?ham. nothing.oph. you are merry, my lord.ham. who, i?oph. ay, my lord.ham. oh god, your only jigmaker; what shoulda man do, but be merry? for look you how chearfully my mother looks, and my father dy'd withinthese two hours.oph. nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.ham. so long? nay then let the devil wear black,for i'll have a suit of sables. oh heav'ns! dye twomonths ago, and not forgotten yet! then there's hope,a great man's memory may outlive his life half ayear: but by'rlady he must build churches then; orelse shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobbyhorse; whose epitaph is for oh, for oh, the hobbyhorseis forgot.king. full thirty times hath phœbus' car gone roundneptune's salt wash, and tellus' orbed ground;and thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheenabout the world have time twelve thirties been,since love our hearts, and hymen did our handsunite commutual, in most sacred bands.queen. so many journeys may the sun and moonmake us again count o'er, ere love be done.but woe is me, you are so sick of late,so far from cheer and from your former state,that i distrust you; yet though i distrust,discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:and women's fear and love hold quantity,'tis either none, or in extremity;now what my love is, proof hath made you know,and as my love is fix'd, my fear is so.king. faith, i must leave thee, love; and shortly too;my operant powers their functions leave to do,and thou shalt live in this fair world behind,honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kindfor husband shalt thouqueen. oh, confound the rest!such love must needs be treason in my breast:in second husband let me be accurst,none wed the second, but who kill'd the first.ham. wormwood, wormwood!queen. the instances that second marriage move,are base respects of thrift, but none of love.a second time i kill my husband dead,when second husband kisses me in bed.king. i do believe you think what now you speak;but what we do determine, oft we break:purpose is but the slave to memory,of violent birth, but poor validity;which now, like fruits unripe, sticks on the tree,but fall unshaken, when they mellow be.most necessary 'tis that we forget,to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:what to our selves in passion we propose,the passion ending, doth the purpose lose;the violence of either grief or joy,their own enactors with themselves destroy:where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident.this world is not for aye, and 'tis not strangethat even our loves should with our fortunes change;for 'tis a question left us yet to prove,whether love fortune lead, or fortune love.the great man down, you mark his fav'rite flies;the poor, advanc'd, makes friends of enemies:and hitherto doth love on fortune tend,for who not needs, shall never lack a friend;and who in want a hollow friend doth try,directly seasons him his enemy.but orderly to end where i begun,our wills and fates do so contrary run,that our devices still are overthrown,our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.so think thou wilt no second husband wed,but die thy thoughts, when thy first lord is dead.queen. nor earth to give me food, nor heaven light,sport and repose lock from me, day and night;each opposite that blanks the face of joy,meet what i would have well, and it destroy,both here, and hence, pursue me lasting strife!if once a widow, ever i be wife.ham. if she should break it now——king. 'tis deeply sworn; sweet, leave me here a while,my spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguilethe tedious day with sleep.queen. sleep rock thy brain,and never come mischance between us twain!ham. madam, how like you this play?queen. the lady protests too much, methinks.ham. oh but she'll keep her word.king. have you heard the argument, is there no offence in't?ham. no, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, nooffence i'th' world.king. what do you call the play?ham. the mousetrap. marry, how? tropically.this play is the image of a murther done in vienna;gonzago is the duke's name, his wife baptista; youshall see anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work; but whato' that? your majesty, and we that have free souls,it touches us not; let the galled jade wince; our withersare unwrung.this is one lucianus, nephew to the duke.oph. you are as good as a chorus, my lord.ham. i could interpret between you and your love,if i could see the puppets dallying.oph. you are keen, my lord; you are keen.ham. it would cost you a groaning to take off myedge.oph. still worse and worse.ham. so you must take your husbands.begin murtherer. leave thy damnable faces, and begin.come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.luc. thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, andtime agreeing;confederate season, else no creature seeing;thou mixture rank, of midnightweeds collected,with hecate's bane, thrice blasted, thrice infected,thy natural magic, and dire property,on wholesome life usurp immediately.ham. he poisons him i'th' garden for's estate; hisname's gonzago; the story is extant, and writ in choiceitalian. you shall see anon how the murtherer getsthe love of gonzago's wife.oph. the king rises.queen. how fares my lord?pol. give o'er the play.king. give me some light. away.all. lights, lights, lights!ham. why let the strucken deer go weep,the hart ungalled play:for some must watch, whilst some must sleep;so runs the world away.would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, (if therest of my fortunes turn turk with me) with two provinicialroses on my rayed shoes, get me a fellowshipin a city of players, sir?hor. half a hare.ham. a whole one i.for thou dost know, oh damon dear,this realm dismantled wasof jove himself, and now reigns herea very very peacock.hor. you might have rim'd.ham. oh good horatio, i'll take the ghost's wordfor a thousand pounds. didst perceive?hor. very well, my lord.ham. upon the talk of the poisoning?hor. i did very well note him.ham. oh, ha! come some musick. come the recorders.for if the king like not the comedy,why then belike he likes it not perdy.come, some musick.guil. good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.ham. sir, a whole history.guil. the king, sir———ham. ay sir, what of him?guil. is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.ham. with drink, sir?guil. no, my lord, with choler.ham. your wisdom should shew it self more richto signify this to his doctor: for me to put him tohis purgation, would perhaps plunge him into morecholer.guil. good my lord, put your discourse into someframe, and start not so wildly from my affair.ham. i am tame, sir, pronounce.guil. the queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.ham. you are welcome.guil. nay, good my lord, this courtesie is not ofthe right breed. if it shall please you to make me awholsome answer, i will do your mother’s commandment; if not, your pardon, and my return shall bethe end of my business.ham. sir, i cannot.guil. what, my lord?ham. make you a wholsome answer: my wit's diseas'd. but, sir, such answers as i can make, youshall command; or rather as you say, my mother—therefore no more but to the matter—my mother,you say—ros. then thus she says; your behaviour hath struckher into amazement, and admiration.ham. oh wonderful son, that can so astonish amother! but is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration?ros. she desires to speak with you in her closet ereyou go to bed.ham. we shall obey, were she ten times our mother. have you any further trade with us?ros. my lord, you once did love me.ham. so i do still, by these pickers and stealers.ros. good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do surely bar the door of your own liberty,if you deny your griefs to your friend.ham. sir, i lack advancement.ros. how can that be, when you have the voice ofthe king himself, for your succession in denmark?ham. ay, but while the grass grows — the proverbis something musty.oh the recorders, let me see one. to withdraw withyou — why do you go about to recover the windof me, as if you would drive me into a toil?guil. oh my lord, if my duty be too bold, my loveis too unmannerly.ham. i do not well understand that. will you playupon this pipe?guil. my lord, i cannot.ham. i pray you.guil. believe me, i cannot.ham. i do beseech you.guil. i know no touch of it, my lord.ham. 'tis as easy as lying; govern these ventageswith your fingers and thumb, give it breath with yourmouth, and it will discourse most eloquent musick.look you, these are the stops.guil. but these cannot i command to any utteranceof harmony, i have not the skill.ham. why look you now, how unworthy a thingyou make of me; you would play upon me, youwould seem to know my stops; you would pluck outthe heart of my mystery; you would sound me frommy lowest note, to the top of my compass; and thereis much musick, excellent voice, in this little organ,yet cannot you make it speak. why do you think thati am easier to be played on than a pipe? call me whatinstrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannotplay upon me. god bless you, sir.pol. my lord, the queen would speak with you, andpresently.ham. do you see yonder cloud, that's almost inshape of a camel?pol. by the mass, and it's like a camel indeed.ham. methinks it is like an ouzle.pol. it is black like an ouzle.ham. or like a whale?pol. very like a whale.ham. then will i come to my mother by and by—they fool me to the top of my bent;— i will comeby and by.pol. i will say so.ham. by and by is casily said. leave, me friends. 'tis now the very witching time of night,when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breaths outcontagion to this world. now could i drink hotblood,and do such bitter business as the daywould quake to look on. soft, now to my mother—oh heart, lose not thy nature; let not everthe soul of nero enter this firm bosom;let me be cruel, not unnatural;i will speak daggers to her, but use none.my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites!king. i like him not, nor stands it safe with usto let his madness rage. therefore prepare you;i your commission will forthwith dispatch,and he to england shall along with you.the terms of our estate may not endurehazard so near us, as doth hourly growout of his lunacies.guild. we will provide our selves;most holy and religious fear, it is,to keep those many bodies safe, that liveand feed upon your majesty.ros. the single and peculiar life is boundwith all the strength and armour of the mind,to keep it self from noyance; but much more,that spirit, on whose a weal depends and reststhe lives of many. the decease of majestydies not alone, but like a gulf doth drawwhat's near it with it. it's a massy wheelfixt on the summit of the highest mount,to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser thingsare mortiz'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,each small annexment, petty consequence,attends the boistrous ruin. ne'er alonedid the king sigh, but with a general groan.king. arm you, i pray you, to this speedy voyage;for we will fetters put upon this fear,which now goes too freefooted.both. we will haste us.pol. my lord, he's going to his mother's closet;behind the arras i'll convey my selfto hear the process. i'll warrant she'll tax him home.and as you said, and wisely was it said,'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,(since nature makes them partial,) should o'erhearthe speech of vantage. fare you well my liege,i'll call upon you ere you go to bed,and tell you what i know.king. thanks, dear my lord.oh my offence is rank, it smells to heav'n,it hath the primal eldest curse upon't;a brother's murther. pray i cannot,though inclination be as sharp as will:my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,and like a man to double business bound;i stand in pause where i shall first begin,and both neglect. what if this cursèd handwere thicker than it self with brother's blood?is there not rain enough in the sweet heav'nsto wash it white as snow? whereto serves mercy,but to confront the visage of offence!and what’s in prayer, but this twofold force,to be forestalled ere we come to fall,or pardon’d being down? then i'll look up.my fault is past. but oh what form of prayercan serve my turn; forgive me my foul murther!that cannot be, since i am still possestof those effects for which i did the murther,my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen,may one be pardon’d, and retain th’ offence?in the corrupted currents of this world,offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice;and oft ’tis seen, the wicked prize it selfbuys out the law; but 'tis not so above:there is no shuffling, there the action liesin his true nature, we our selves compell’dev'n to the teeth and forehead of our faults,to give in evidence.’ what then? what rests?try what repentance can. what can it not?yet what can it, when one cannot repent?oh wretched state! oh bosom, black as death!oh limed soul, that struggling to be freeart more engag’d! help angels, make assay!bow stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel!be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!all may be well. ham. now might i do it pat, now he is praying,and now i’ll do’t.and so he goes to heav’n,and so am i reveng’d? that would be scann’d,—a villain kills my father, and for thati, his sole son, do this same villain sendto heav’n—o this is hire and salary, not revenge.he took my father grossly, full of bread,with all his crimes broad blown; as fresh as may;and how his audit stands, who knows, save heav’n?but in our circumstance and course of thought,'tis heavy with him. am i then reveng'd,to take him in the purging of his soul,when he is fit and season'd for his passage?up sword, and know thou a more horrid time:when he is drunk, asleep, or in his rage;or in th' infectious pleasure of his bed,at gaming, swearing, or about some actthat has no relish of salvation in't,then trip him, that his heels may kick at heav'n,and that his soul may be as damn'd and blackas hell, whereto it goes. my mother stays;this physic but prolongs thy sickly days. king. my words fly up, my thoughts remain below;words, without thoughts, never to heaven go.pol. he will come straight; look you lay home to him,tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,and that your grace hath screen'd, and stood betweenmuch heat and him. i'll silence me e'en here;pray you be round.queen. i'll warrant you, fear me not.withdraw, i hear him coming.ham. now, mother, what’s the matter?queen. hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.ham. mother, you have my father much offended.queen. come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.ham. go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.queen. why, how now, hamlet?ham. what's the matter now?queen. have you forgot me?ham. no, by the rood, not so;you are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,and (would it were not so) you are my mother.queen. nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.ham. come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;you go not till i set you up a glasswhere you may see the inmost part of you.queen. what wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?help, ho.pol. what ho, help.ham. how now, a rat? dead for a ducate, dead.pol. oh i am slain.queen. oh me, what hast thou done?ham. nay i know not: is it the king?queen. oh, what a rash and bloody deed is this!ham. a bloody deed, almost as bad, good mother,as kill a king, and marry with his brother.queen. as kill a king?ham. ay, lady, 'twas my word.thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.i took thee for thy better; take thy fortune;thou find'st, to be too busy, is some danger.leave wringing of your hands, peace, sit you down,and let me wring your heart, for so i shallif it be made of penetrable stuff;if damned custom have not braz'd it so,that it is proof and bulwark against sense.queen. what have i done, that thou dar'st wag thy tonguein noise so rude against me?ham. such an act,that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rosefrom the fair forehead of an innocent love,and sets a blister there; makes marriagevows.as false as dicers oaths. oh such a deed,as from the body of contraction plucksthe very soul, and sweet religion makesa rhapsody of words. heav'n's face doth glowo'er this solidity and compound mass,with tristful visage as against the doom.'tis thoughtsick at the act.queen. ay me, what act,that roars so loud, and thunders in the index?ham. look here upon this picture, and on this,the counterfeit presentment of two brothers:see what a grace was seated on this brow,hyperion’s curls, the front of jove himself,an eye like mars, to threaten or command,a station like the herald mercury:newlighted on a heav'nkissing hill;a combination, and a form indeed,where every god did seem to set his seal,to give the world assurance of a man.this was your husband. —— look you now what follows,here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear,blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes?could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,and batten on this moore? ha! have you eyes?you cannot call it love; for at your age,the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,and waits upon the judgment; and what judgmentwould step from this to this? what devil was't,that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind? .o shame! where is thy blush? rebellious hell,if thou canst mutiny in a matron's bones,to flaming youth let virtue be as wax,and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame,when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,since frost it self as actively doth burn,and reason a pardons will.queen. o hamlet, speak no more.thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,and there i see such black and grained spotsas will not leave their tinct.ham. nay, but to livein the rank sweat of an incestuous bed,stew'd in corruption, honeying and making loveover the nasty sty.queen. oh speak no more;these words like daggers enter in mine ears.no more, sweet hamlet.ham. a murderer, and a villain!a slave, that is not twentieth part the tytheof your precedent lord. a vice of kings,a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,that from a shelf the precious diadem stole,and put it in his pocket!a king of shreds and patches———save me! and hover o'er me with your wingsyou heav'nly guards! what would your gracious figure?queen. alas he's mad.ham. do you not come your tardy son to chide,that lapsed in time and passion, lets go byth' important acting of your dread command? o say!ghost. do not forget: this visitationis but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.but look! amazement on thy mother sits;o step between her and her fighting soul;conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.speak to her, hamlet.ham. how is it with you, lady?queen. alas, how is't with you?that thus you bend your eye on vacancy,and with th' incorporeal air do hold discourse?forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,and as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,start up, and stand on end. o gentle son,upon the heat and flame of thy distempersprinkle cool patience. whereon do you look?ham. on him! on him!—look you how pale he glares!his form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,would make them capable. do not look on me,lest with this piteous action you convertmy stern effects; then what i have to do,will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.queen. to whom do you speak this?ham. do you see nothing there?queen. nothing at all; yet all that is i see.ham. nor did you nothing hear?queen. no, nothing but ourselves.ham. why look you there? look how it steals away!my father in his habit as he lived!look where he goes ev'n now out at the portal,queen. this is the very coinage of your brain,this bodiless creation ecstasieis very cunning in.ham. what ecstasie?my pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,and makes as healthful musick. 'tis not madnessthat i have utter'd; bring me to the testand i the matter will reword; which madnesswould gambol from. mother, for love of grace,lay not that flattering unction to your soul,that not your trespass, but my madness speaks;it will but skin and film the ulcerous place,whilst rank corruption, running all within,infects unseen. confess your self to heav'n,repent what's past; avoid what is to come,and do not spread the compost on the weedsto make them ranker. forgive this my virtue;for in the fatness of these pursie times,virtue it self of vice must pardon beg,yea, 't courb, and woe, for leave to do it good.queen. oh hamlet! thou hast cleft my heart in twain.ham. o throw away the worser part of it,and live the purer with the other half.good night; but go not to mine uncle's bed;assume a virtue, if you have it not.that monster custom, who all sense doth eat,of habit's devil, is angel yet in this;that to the use of actions fair and goodhe likewise gives a frock or liverythat aptly is put on. refrain tonight,and that shall lend a kind of easinessto the next abstinence, the next more easy;for use can almost change the stamp of nature,and master ev'n the devil, or throw him outwith wondrous potency. once more, good night:and when you are desirous to be blest,i'll blessing beg of you. for this same lord,i do repent: but heav'n hath pleas'd it so,to punish me with this, and this with me,that i must be their scourge and minister.i will bestow him, and will answer wellthe death i gave him. so again, good night.i must be cruel, only to be kind,thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.queen. what shall i do?ham. not this by no means that i bid you do;let the fond king tempt you again to bed;pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,and let him for a pair of reechy kisses,or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,make you to ravel all this matter out,that i essentially am not in madness,but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know:for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,would from a paddock, from a bat, a gibbe,such dear concernings hide? who would do so?no, in despight of sense and secrecy,unpeg the basket on the house's top,let the birds fly, and like the famous apeto try conclusions, in the basket creep,and break your own neck down.queen. be thou assured, if words be made of breath,and breath of life: i have no life to breathewhat thou hast said to me.ham. i must to england, you know that?queen. alack, i had forgot; 'tis so concluded on.ham. there's letters seal'd, and my two schoolfellows,(whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,)they bear the mandate; they must sweep my wayand marshal me to knavery: let it work;for 'tis the sport to have the engineerhoist with his own petar: an't shall go hardbut i will delve one yard below their mines,and blow them at moon. o 'tis most sweetwhen in one line two crafts directly meet!this man shall set me packing;i'll lug the guts into the neighbour room;mother, good night. indeed this counselloris now most still, most secret, and most grave,who was in life a foolish prating knave.come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.good night, mother. king. there's matter in these sighs; these profound heavesyou must translate, 'tis fit we understand them.where is your son?queen. ah, my good lord, what havei seen tonight?king. what, gertrude? how does hamlet?queen. mad as the seas, and wind, when both contendwhich is the mightier; in his lawless fit,behind the arras hearing something stir,he whips his rapier out, and cries, 'a rat!'and in his brainish apprehension, killsthe unseen good old man.king. o heavy deed!it had been so with us, had we been there:his liberty is full of threats to all;to you yourself, to us, to every one.alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?it will be laid to us, whose providenceshould have kept short, restrain'd, and out of hauntthis mad young man. but so much was our love,we would not understand what was most fit;but like the owner of a foul disease,to keep it from divulging, let it feede'er on the pith of life... where is he gone?queen. to draw apart the body he hath kill'd,o'er whom his very madness, like some oreamong a mineral of metals base,shews itself pure. he weeps for what is done.king. oh gertrude, come away.the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,but we will ship him hence; and this vile deedwe must, with all our majesty and skill,both countenance, and excuse. ho! guildenstern!friends both, go join you with some further aid:hamlet in madness hath polonius slain,and from his mother's closet hath he drag'd him.go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the bodyinto the chapel. pray you haste in this.come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends,and let them know both what we mean to do,and what's untimely done. oh come away,my soul is full of discord and dismay. ham. safely stowed _______gentlemen within. hamlet! lord hamlet!ham. what noise? who calls on hamlet?oh here they come.ros. what have you done, my lord, with the dead body?ham. compounded it with dust; whereto 'tis kin.ros. tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence,and bear it to the chapel.ham. do not believe it.ros. believe what?ham. that i can keep your counsel, and not mine own. besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son of a king?ros. take you me for a sponge, my lord?ham. ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance,his rewards, his authorities; but such officers do theking best service in the end; he keeps them like aapple in the corner of his jaw; first mouth'd, to belast swallow'd: when he needs what you have glean'd,it is but squeezing you, and sponge; you shall be dryagain.ros. i understand you not, my lord;ham. i am glad of it; a knavish speech sleeps in afoolish ear.ros. my lord, you must tell us where the body isand go with us to the king.ham. the body is with the king, but the king isnot with the body. the king is a thing——guild. a thing, my lord?ham. of nothing; bring me to him, hide fox, andall after.king. i've sent to seek him, and to find the body;how dangerous is it that this man goes loose!yet must not we put the strong law on him;he's lov'd of the distracted multitude,who like not in their judgment, but their eyes:and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd;but never the offence. to bear all smooth,this sudden sending him away, must seemdeliberate pause; diseases desperate grown,by desperate appliance are relieved,or not at all.how now? what hath befall'n?ros. where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord;we cannot get from him.king. but where is he?ros. without, my lord, guarded to know yourpleasure.284  hamlet, prince of denmark.king. bring him before us.ros. ho, guildenstern! bring in my lord.king. now, hamlet, where's polonius?ham. at supper.king. at supper? where?ham. not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of politicque worms are at him, your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat our selves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes to one table, that's the end.king. alas, alas!ham. a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.king. what dost thou mean by this?ham. nothing but to shew you how a king may goa progress through the guts of a beggar.king. where is polonius?ham. in heav'n, send thither to see. if your messenger find him not there, seek him i'th' other place yourself. but indeed, if you find him not this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.king. go seek him there.ham. he will stay 'till ye come.king. hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety (which we do tender, as we dearly grieve for that which thou hast done) must send thee hence with fiery quickness: then prepare thy self, the bark is ready, and the wind at help, th' associates tend, and every thing is bent for england.ham. for england?king. ay, hamlet.ham. good.king. so is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.ham. i see a cherub that sees them; but come,for england! farewell, dear mother.king. thy loving father, hamlet.ham. my mother: father and mother is man andwife; man and wife is one flesh, and so my mother.come, for england.king. follow him at foot, tempt him with speed aboard;delay it not, i'll have him hence tonight.away, for every thing is seal'd and donethat else leans on th' affair; pray you make haste.and england! if my love thou hold'st at ought,as my great power thereof may give thee sense,since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red.after the danish sword, and thy free awe.pays homage to us; thou may'st not coldly ‡ letour sovereign process, which imports at fullby letters b conjuring to that effect,the present death of hamlet. do it england:for like the hectick in my blood he rages,and thou must cure me; 'till i know 'tis done,howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.for. go, captain, from me, greet the danish king,tell him that by his license, fortinbrasclaims the conveyance of a promis'd marchover his realm. you know the rendezvous.if that his majesty would ought with us,we shall express our duty in his eye,and let him know so.capt. i will do't, my lord.for. go softly on. ham. good sir, whose powers are these?capt. they are of norway, sir.ham. how purpos'd sir, i pray you?capt. against some part of poland.ham. who commands them, sir?capt. the nephew of old norway, fortinbras.ham. goes it against the main of poland, sir,or for some frontier?capt. truly to speak it, and with no addition,we go to gain a little patch of groundthat hath in it no profit but the name.to pay five ducats, five i would not farm it,nor will it yield to norway or the polea ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.ham. why then the polack never will defend it.capt. yes, 'tis already garrison'd.ham. two thousand souls, and twenty thousand ducatswill not debate the question of this straw;this is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,that inward breaks, and shews no cause withoutwhy the man dies. i humbly thank you, sir.cap. god b'w'ye, sir.ros. will't please you go, my lord?ham. i'll be with you, go a little before.manet hamlet.how all occasions do inform against me,and spur my dull revenge! what is a man,if his chief good and market of his timebe but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.sure he that made us with such large discourse,looking before and after, gave us notthat capability and godlike reasonto rust in us unus'd. now whether it bebestial oblivion, or some craven scrupleof thinking too precisely on th' event,(a thought which quarter'd hath but one part wisdom,and ever three parts coward:) i do not knowwhy yet i live to say this thing's to do,sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and meansto do't. examples gross as earth exhort me;witness this army of such mass and charge,led by a delicate and tender prince,whose spirit with divine ambition puffmakes mouths at the invisible event,exposing what is mortal and unsureto all that fortune, death, and danger dare,ev'n for an eggshell. 'tis not to be great,never to stir without great argument,but greatly to find quarrel in a straw,when honour's at the stake. how stand i then,that have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd,(excitements of my reason and my blood)and let all sleep; while to my shame i seethe imminent death of twenty thousand men,that for a fantasie and trick of famego to their graves like beds, fight for a spotwhereon the numbers cannot try the cause,which is not tomb enough and continentto hide the slain? o then from this time forth,my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth.queen. i will not speak with her.gent. she is importunate,indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.queen. what would she have?gent. she speaks much of her father; says she hearsthere's tricks i'th world, and hems, and beats her heart,spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubtthat carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,yet the unshaped use of it doth movethe hearers to collection; they aim at it,and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,indeed would make one think there might be thought;though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.hor. 'twere good she were spoken with, for she may strowdangerous conjectures in illbreeding minds.let her come in ————queen. to my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,each toy seems prologue to some great amiss,so full of artless jealousy is guilt,it spills itself in fearing to be spilt.oph. where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?queen. how now, ophelia?oph. how should i your true love know from another one?by his cockle hat and staff, and his sandal shoon. queen. alas, sweet lady; what imports this song?oph. say you? nay, pray you mark.he's dead and gone, lady, he is dead and gone,at his head a grassgreen turf, at his heels a stone.queen. nay, but ophelia ————oph. pray you mark.white his shroud as the mountain snow.queen. alas, look here, my lord.oph. larded with sweet flowers:which wept to the grave did go,with truelove showers.king. how do ye, pretty lady?oph. well, god dild you. they say the owl was a baker's daughter. lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. god be at your table.king. conceit upon her father.oph. pray let us have no words of this; but whenthey ask you what it means, say you this:tomorrow is st. valentine's day, all in the morn betime,and i a maid at your window, to be your valentine.then up he rose, and don'd his clothes, and dupt thechamberdoor;let in a maid, that out a maid never departed more.king. pretty ophelia!oph. indeed? without an oath, i'll make an end on't:by gis, and by s. charity;alack, and fie for shame,young men will do't, if they come to't;by cock they are to blame.quoth she, before you tumbled me,you promis'd me to wed:so would i ha' done, by yonder sun,and thou hadst not come to my bed.king. how long hath he been thus?oph. i hope all will be well. we must be patient,but i cannot chuse but weep, to think they should layhim i'th' cold ground; my brother shall know of it,and so i thank you for your good counsel. come,my coach; goodnight, ladies; goodnight, sweet ladies; goodnight, goodnight. king. follow her close, give her good watch, ipray you;this is the poison of deep grief, it springsall from her father's death. o gertrude, gertrude!when sorrows come, they come not single spies,but in battalions. first, her father slain,next you son gone, and he most violent authorof his own just remove, the people muddied,thick and unwholsome in their thoughts and whispers,for good polonius' death. we've done but greenly,in private to inter him; poor opheliadivided from her self, and her fair judgment,(without the which we're pictures, or mere beasts;)last, and as much containing as all these,her brother is in secret come from france,feeds on this wonder, keeps himself in clouds,and wants not buzzers to infect his earwith pestilent speeches of his father's death;wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,will nothing stick our persons to arraignin ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this,like to a murdering piece in many places,gives me superfluous death!king. where are my switzers? let them guard the door.what is the matter?mess. save your self, my lord.the ocean overpeering of his listeats not the flats with more impetuous haste,than young laertes, in a riotous head,o'erbears your officers; the rabble call him lord,and as the world were now but to begin,antiquity forgot, custom not known,the ratifiers and props of every word;they cry, chuse we laertes for our king.caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds.laertes shall be king, laertes king.queen. how cheerfully on the false trail they cry,oh this is counter, you false danish dogs.king. the doors are broke. laer. where is the king? sirs! stand you all without.all. no, let's come in.laer. i pray you give me leave.all. we will, we will.laer. i thank you; keep the door.o thou vile king, give me my father.queen. calmly, good laertes.laer. that drop of blood that's calm, proclaims mebastard,crys cuckold to my father, brands the harloteven here between the chaste and unfilm'd browof my true mother.king. what is the cause, laertes,that thy rebellion looks so giantlike?let him go, gertrude; do not fear our person:there's such divinity doth hedge a kingthat treason can but peep to what it would,acts little of its will. tell me, laertes,why are you thus incensed? let him go, gertrude.speak man.laer. where is my father?king. dead.queen. but not by him.king. let him demand his fill.laer. how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with,to hell, allegiance! vows, to the black devil!conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit;i dare damnation; to this point i stand,that both the worlds i give to negligence,let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'dmost throughly for my father.king. who shall stay you?laer. my will, not all the world's.and for my means, i'll husband them so well,they shall go far with little.king. good laertes:if you desire to know the certaintyof your dear father's death, in your revenge,(that sweepstake,) you will draw both friend and foe,winner and loser.laer. none but his enemies.king. will you know them then?laer. to his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms,and like the kind liferending pelican,repast them with my blood.king. why now you speaklike a good child, and a true gentleman.that i am guiltless of your father's death,and am most sensibly in grief for it,it shall as level to your judgment pierce,as day does to your eye. laer. let her come in. how now? what noise is that?o heat dry up my brains, tears seven times saltburn out the sense and virtue of mine eye.by heav'n, thy madness shall be paid with weight,till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may!dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia!o heavens, is't possible a young maid's witsshould be as mortal as an old man's life?nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,it sends some precious instance of it selfafter the thing it loves.oph. they bore him barefac'd on the bier,and on his grave rains many a tear,fare you well, my dove.laer. hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, it could not move thus.oph. you must sing, down adown, and you call him adowna. o how the wheel becomes it? it is the false steward that stole his master's daughter.laer. this nothing's more than matter.oph. there's rosemary, that's for remembrance; pray love remember; and there's pancies, that's for thoughts.laer. a document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.oph. there's fennel for you, and columbines; there's rue for you, and here's some for me. we may call itit herb of grace a sundays: you may wear your ruewith a difference. there's a daisie; i would give yousome violets, but they withered all when my fatherdy'd: they say, he made a good end;for bonny sweet robin is all my joy.laer. thought, and affliction, passion, hell itself,she turns to favour, and to prettiness.oph. and will he not come again?and will he not come again?no, no, he is dead, go to thy deathbed,he never will come again.his beard as white as snow,all flaxen was his pole.he is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan,gramercy on his soul.and of all christian souls! god b'w'ye.laer. do you see this, you gods?king. laertes, i must commune with your grief,or you deny me right: go but apart,make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me;if by direct or by collateral handthey find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,our crown, our life, and all that we call oursto you in satisfaction. but if not,be you content to lend your patience to us,and we shall jointly labour with your soul,to give it due content.laer. let this be so.his means of death, his obscure funeral,no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,no noble rite, nor formal ostentation,cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,that i must call in question.king. so you shall:and where th'offence is, let the great ax fall.i pray you go with me.hor. what are they that would speak with me?ser. sailors, sir, they say they have letters for you.hor. let them come in.i do not know from what part of the worldi should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet.sail. god bless you, sir.hor. let him bless thee too.sail. he shall, sir, a'nt please him. there's a letter for you, sir: it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for england, if your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is.hor. reads the letter.horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd this, give these fellows some means to the king: they have letters for him. ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chace. finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple i boarded them: on the instant they got clear of our ship, so i alone became their prisoner. they have dealt with me, like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did. i am to do a good turn for them. let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldest fly death. i have words to speak in thy ear, will make thee dumb, yet are they much too light for the matter. these good fellows will bring thee where i am. rosincrosse and guildenstern hold their course for england. of them i have much to tell thee. farewell.        he that thou knowest thine, hamlet.come, i will make you way for these your letters,and do't the speedier, that you may direct meto him from whom you brought them.king. now must your conscience my acquittance seal,and you must put me in your heart for friend,sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,that he which hath your noble father slain,pursued my life.laer. it well appears. but tell me,why you proceeded not against these feats,so crimeful and so capital in nature,as by your safety, wisdom, all things else,you mainly were stirr'd up?king. two special reasons,which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd,and yet to me are strong. the queen, his mother,lives almost by his looks; and for my self,my virtue or my plague, be't either which,she's so conjunctive to my life and soul;that as the star moves not but in his sphere,i could not but by her. the other motive,why to a publick count i might not go,is the great love the general gender bear him;who dipping all his faults in their affection,would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,convert his gyves to graces. so my arrowstoo slightly timbered for so loud a wind,would have reverted to my bow again,and not where i had aim'd them.laer. and so have i a noble father lost,a sister driven into desperate terms,whose worth, if praises may go back again,stood challenger on mount of all the agefor her perfections—but revenge will come.king. break not your sleeps for that, you must not thinkthat we are made of stuff so flat and dull,that we can let our beard be shook with danger,and think it pastime. you shall soon hear more.i lov’d your father, and we love yourself,and that i hope will teach you to imagine———mess. these to your majesty: this to the queen.king. from hamlet? who brought them?mess. sailors, my lord, they say; i saw them not:they were given me by claudio, he receiv'd them.king. laertes, you shall hear them: leave us, all——— high and mighty, you shall know i am set naked on your kingdom. tomorrow shall i beg leave to see yourkingly eyes. when i shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount th' occasion of my sudden return. hamlet.what should this mean? are all the rest come back?or is it some abuse———and no such thing?laer. know you the hand?king. 'tis hamlet’s character;naked, and (in a postscript here, he says)alone: can you advise me?laer. i'm lost in it, my lord: but let him come,it warms the very sickness in my heart,that i shall live and tell him to his teeth,thus diddest thou.king. if it be so, laertes,as how should it be so?———how otherwise?———will you be rul'd by me?laer. i, so you'll not o'errule me to a peace.king. to thine own peace: if he be now return'd,as liking not his voyage, and that he meansno more to undertake it; i will work himto an exploit now ripe in my device,under the which he shall not choose, but fall. and for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,but ev'n his mother shall uncharge the practice,and call it accident.laer. i will be rul'd,the rather if you could devise it sothat i might be the instrument.king. it falls right:you have been talkt of since your travel much,and that in hamlet's hearing, for a qualitywherein they say you shine; your sum of partsdid not together pluck such envy from him,as did that one, and that in my regardof the unworthiest siege.laer. what part is that, my lord?king. a very feather in the cap of youth,yet needful too, for youth no less becomesthe light and careless livery that it wears,than settled age his sables, and his weeds,importing health and graveness. two months sincehere was a gentleman of normandy;i've seen myself and serv'd against the french,and they can well on horseback; but this gallanthad witchcraft in't; he grew unto his seat;and to such wondrous doing brought his horse,as he had been incorps'd and demynatur'dwith the brave beast so far he past my thought,that i in forgery of shapes and tricks,come short of what he did.laer. a norman was't?king. a norman.laer. upon my life, lamond.king. the very same.laer. i know him well, he is the brooch indeed,and gem of all the nation.king. he made confession of you;and gave you such a masterly report,for art and exercise in your defence;and for your rapier most especial,that he cry'd out, 'twould be a sight indeed.if one could match you. this report of hisdid hamlet so envenom with his envy,that he could nothing do, but wish and begyour sudden coming o'er to play with him.now out of this——.laer. what out of this, my lord?king. laertes, was your father dear to you?or are you like the painting of a sorrow,a face without a heart?laer. why ask you this?king. not that i think you did not love your father,but that i know love is begun by time;and that i see in passages of proof,time qualifies the spark and fire of it.there lives within the very flame of lovea kind of wick or snuff that will abate it.and nothing is at a like goodness still;for goodness growing to a pleurisie,dies in his own too much; what we would do,we should do when we would; for this would changes,and hath abatements and delays as manyas there are tongues, are hands, are accidents,and then this should is like a spendthrift's sighthat hurts by easing; but to th' quick o'th' ulcer—,hamlet comes back; what would you undertaketo shew yourself your father's son indeed,more than in words?laer. to cut his throat i'th' church.king. no place indeed should murther sanctuarise;revenge should have no bounds; but, good laertes,will you do this, keep close within your chamber?hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home.we'll put on those shall praise your excellence,and set a double varnish on the famethe frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together,and wager on your heads. he being remiss,most generous, and free from all contriving,will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,or with a little shuffling, you may chusea sword unbated, and in a pass of practicerequite him for your father.laer. i will do't;and for the purpose i'll anoint my sword:i bought an unction of a mountebank,so mortal, that but dip a knife in it,where it draws blood, no cataplasm so rare,collected from all simples that have virtueunder the moon, can save the thing from death,that is but scratch'd withal; i'll touch my pointwith this contagion, if i gall him slightlyit may be death.king. let's farther think of this,weigh what convenience both of time and meansmay fit us to our shape. if this should fail,and that our drift look through our bad performance,'twere better not assay'd; therefore this projectshould have a back, or second, that might hold,if this should blast in proof. soft—let me see—we'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings,i ha't—when in your motion you are hot,and make your bouts more violent to th' end,and that he calls for drink; i'll have prepar'd hima chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,if he by chance escape your venom'd tuck,our purpose may hold there. how now, sweet queen?queen. one woe doth tread upon another's heel,so fast they follow: your sister's drown'd, laertes.laer. drown'd! oh where?queen. there is a willow grows aslant a brook,that shews his hoar leaves in the glassie stream:there with fantastick garlands did he come,of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purplesthat liberal shepherds give a grosser name,but our cold maids do dead mens fingers call them.there on the pendant boughs, her coronet weedsclamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke;when down her weedy trophies and her selffell in the weeping brook; her cloaths spread wide,and mermaidlike, awhile they bore her up;which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,as one incapable of her own distress,or like a creature native, and induedunto that element: but long it could not be,'till that her garments, heavy with their drink,pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious layto muddy death.laer. alas then, she is drown'd.queen. drown'd, drown'd.laer. too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia,and therefore i forbid my tears: but yetit is our trick, nature her custom holds,let shame say what it will; when these are gone,the woman will be out: adieu, my lord;i have a speech of fire that fain would blaze,but that this folly drowns it. king. follow, gertrude:how much had i to do to calm his rage!now fear i, this will give it start again,therefore let's follow.1 clown.is she to be buried in christian burialthat willfully seeks her own salvation?2 clown. i tell thee, she is; therefore make her grave straight: the crownerhath sat on her, and finds it christian burial.1 clown. how can that be, unlessshe drowned herself in her own defence?2 clown. why 'tis found so.1 clown. it must be se offendendo; it cannot be else:for here lyes the point; if i drown myself wittingly,it argues an act; and an act hath three branches.it is to act, to do, and to perform: argal, she drown'dher self wittingly.2 clown. nay, but hear you, goodman deliver.1 clown. give me leave; here lyes the water, good:here stands the man, good: if the man go to this water, and drown himself; it is will he, nill he, he goes;mark you that: but if the water come to him, anddrown him; he drowns not himself. argal, he thatis not guilty of his own death, shortens not his own life.2 clown. but is this law?1 clown. ay marry is't, crowner's quest law.2 clown. will you ha' the truth on't? if this hadnot been a gentlewoman, she should have been buriedout of christian burial.1 clown. why there thou say'st. and the morepity that great folk should have countenance in thisworld to drown or hang themselves, more than otherchristians. come, my spade; there is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers and gravemakers; theyhold up adam's profession.2 clown. was he a gentleman?1 clown. he was the first that ever bore arms.2 clown. why, he had none.1 clown. what, art a heathen? how dost thou understand the scripture? the scripture says, adam digg'd;could he dig without arms? i'll put another questionto thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thy self––––2 clown. go to.1 clown. what is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?2 clown. the gallowsmaker, for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.1 clown. i like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows well; but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may do well to thee. to't again, come.2 clown. who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?––––1 clown. ay, tell me that, and unyoke.2 clown. marry, now i can tell.1 clown. to it.2 clown. mass, i cannot tell.1 clown. cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this question next, say a gravemaker. the houses he makes, last 'till doomsday: go, get thee to vaughan, fetch me a stoup of liquor.he digs and sings.in youth when i did love, did love,methought it was very sweet;to contract o'h the time for a my behove,oh methought there was nothing meet.ham. has this fellow no feeling of his business,that he sings at gravemaking?hor. custom hath made it to him a property of easiness.ham. 'tis e'en so; the hand of little employmenthath the daintier sense.clown sings.but age with his stealing steps,hath claw'd me in his clutch:and hath shipped me into the land,as if i ne'er had been such.ham. that skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once;how the knave jowles it to the ground, as if it were cain's jawbone,that did the first murder!this might be the pate of a politician which this ass o'eroffices;one that could circumvent god, might it not?hor. it might, my lord.ham. or of a courtier, which could say, goodmorrow sweet lord;how dost thou, good lord? this might be my lord such a one,that prais'd my lord such a ones horse,when he meant to beg it, might it not?hor. ay, my lord.ham. why e'en so: and now my lady worm's, chopless,and knockt about the mazzard with a sexton's spade.here's a fine revolution, if we had the trick to see't.did these bones cost no more the breeding,but to play at loggers with 'em? mine ake to think on't.clown sings.a pickaxe and a spade, a spade:for and, a shrouding sheet!o, a pit of clay, for to be madefor such a guest is meet.ham. there's another: why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? where be his quiddits now? his quillets? his cases? his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery? hum! this fellow might be in's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? the very conveyances of his lands will hardly lye in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more? ha?hor. not a jot more, my lord.ham. is not parchment made of sheepskins?hor. ay my lord, and of calveskins too.ham. they are sheep and calves that seek out assurance in that. i will speak to this fellow: whose grave's this, sirrah?clown. mine, sir———o, a pit of clay for to be made,for such a ghost is meet.ham. i think it be thine indeed; for thou liest in't.clown. you lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not yours; for my part i do not lie in't, yet it is mine.ham. thou dost lie in't, to be in't, and say 'tis thine; 'tis for the dead, not for the quick, therefore thou liest.clown. 'tis a quick lie, sir, 'twill away again from me to you.ham. what man dost thou dig it for?clown. for no man, sir.ham. what woman then?clown. for none neither.ham. who is to be buried in't?clown. one that was a woman, sir; but rest hersoul, she's dead.ham. how absolute the knave is? we must speak bythe card, or equivocation will follow us. by the lord,horatio, these three years i have taken note of it; theage is grown so picked, that the toe of the peasantcomes so near the heel of our courtier, he galls hiskibe. how long hast thou been a gravemaker?clown. of all the days i'th' year, i came to't thatday that our last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.ham. how long is that since?clown. cannot you tell that? every fool can tellthat: it was that very day that young hamlet wasborn; he that was mad, and sent to england.ham. ay marry, why was he sent into england?clown. why, because he was mad; he shall recoverhis wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matterthere.ham. why?clown. 'twill not be seen in him, there the menare as mad as he.ham. how came he mad?clown. very strangely, they say.ham. how strangely?clown. faith e'en with losing his wits.ham. upon what ground?clown. why, here in denmark. i have been sextonhere, man and boy, thirty years.ham. how long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?clown. i'faith, if he be not rotten before he die,(as we have many pocky coarse nowadays, that will,scarce hold the laying in) he will last you some eightyear, or nine year; a tanner will last you nine years.ham. why he, more than another?clown. why sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade,that he will keep out water a great while. and yourwater is a sore decayer of your whorson dead body.here's a scull now has lain in the earth three andtwenty years.ham. whose was it?clown. a whorson mad fellow's, it was; whose doyou think it was?ham. nay, i know not.clown. a pestilence on him for a mad rogue, hepour'd a flagon of rhenish on my head once. thissame scull, sir, was yorick's scull, the king's jester.ham. this?clown. e'en that.ham. alas poor yorick! i knew him, horatio, a fellowof infinite jest; of most excellent fancy: he hathborn me on his back a thousand times: and now howabhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises atit. here hung those lips that i have kissed i knownot how oft. where be your gibes now? your gambols?your songs? your flashes of merriment thatwere wont to set the table in a roar? not onenow, to mock your own grinning? quite chopfallen!now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, lether paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come;make her laugh at that———pr'ythee, horatio, tell meone thing.hor. what's that, my lord?hor. dost thou think alexander look'd o' this fashion i'th' earth?ham. e'en so.ham. and smelt so, puh?hor. e'en so, my lord.ham. to what base uses we may return, horatio!why may not imagination trace the noble dust of alexander, till he find it stopping a bunghole?hor. 'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.ham. no faith, not a jot. but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it;as thus: alexander died; alexandar was buried; alexander returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earthwe make lome, and why of that lome whereto he wasconverted, might they not stop a beerbarrel?imperial cæsar dead and turn'd to clay,might stop a hole to keep the wind away;osp, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,should patch a wall, t' expel the winter's flaw!but soft! but soft a while —— here comes the king.the queen, the courtiers. what is that they followand with such maimed rites? this doth betoken,the coarse they follow did with desperate handforedo its own life; 'twas of some estate.couch we a while, and mark.laer. what ceremony else?ham. that is laertes, a most noble youth: mark —laer. what ceremony else?priest. her obsequies have been as far enlarg'das we have warranty: her death was doubtful,and but that great command o'erways the order,she should in ground unsanctified have logg'd'till the last trump. for charitable prayers,shards, flints, and pebbles, should be thrown on her;yet here she is allow'd her virgin rites,her maiden strewments, and the bringing homeof bell and burial.laer. must no more be done?priest. no more be done...we should profane the service of the dead,to sing a requiem, and such rest to her,as to peaceparted souls.laer. lay her i'th' earth,and from her fair and unpolluted fleshmay violets spring! i tell thee, churlish priest,a ministring angel shall my sister be;when thou liest howling.ham. what, the fair ophelia!queen. sweets to the sweet, farewell!i hop'd thou would'st have been my hamlet's wife;i thought thy bridebed to have deck'd, sweet maid,and not have strew'd thy grave.laer. o treble woefall' tentimes treble on that curs'd head,whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sensedepriv'd thee of. hold off the earth awhile;till i have caught her once more in my arms,now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,'till of this flat a mountain you have made,t' o'ertop old pelion, or the skyish headof blue olympus.ham. what is he, whosegriefsbear such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrowconjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them standlike wonderwounded hearers? this is i,hamlet the dane.laer. the devil take thy soul!ham. thou pray'st not well.i pr'thee take thy fingers from my throatfor though i am not spleenative and rash,yet have i in me something dangerous,which let thy wisdom fear. hold off thy hand.king. pluck them asunderqueen. hamlet, hamlet—hor. good my lord be quiet.ham. why, i will fight with him upon this theme,until my eyelids will no longer wag.queen. oh my son! what theme?ham. i lov'd ophelia; forty thousand brotherscould not with all their quantity of love.make up my sum. what wilt thou do for her?king. o he is mad, laertes.queen. for love of god forbear him.ham. come show me what thou'lt do.woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thy self?woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?i'll do't. do'st thou come hither but to whine;to outface me with leaping in her grave?be buried quick with her; and so will i;and if thou prate of mountains, let them throwmillions of acres on us, 'till our groundsinging his pate against the burning zone,make ossa like a wart! nay, an thou'lt mouth,i'll rant as well as thou.king. this is mere madness;and thus a while the fit will work on him:and thus a while as the female dove,anon as patient as the teplets are disclosed,when that her golden couplets are disclosed,his silence will sit drooping.ham. hear you sir—what is the reason that you use me thus?i lov'd you ever; but it is no matter—let hercules himself do what he may,the cat will mew, and dog will have his day. king. i pray you good horatio, wait upon him. strengthen your patience in our last night's speech. we'll put the matter to the present push.good gertrude set some watch over your son,this grave shall have a living monument.an hour of quiet shortly shall we see;'till then, in patience our proceeding be.ham. so much for this, now shall you see the other.you do remember all the circumstance.hor. remember it, my lord?ham. sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,that would not let me sleep; methought i layworse than the mutineers in bilboes; rashness(and prais'd be rashness for it) lets us knowour indiscretion sometimes serves us well,when our deep plots do fail; and that should teach us,there's a divinity that shapes our ends,roughhew them how we will.hor. that is most certain.ham. up from my cabin,my seagown scarf about me, in the darkgrop'd i to find out them; had my desire,finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrewto mine own room again, making so bold(my fears forgetting manners) to unsealtheir grand commission, where i found, horatio,a royal knavery; an exact command,larded with many several sorts of reasons,importing denmark's health, and england's too,(with ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,)that on the supervise, no leisure bated,no not to stay the grinding of the ax,my head should be struck off.hor. is't possible?ham. here's the commission, read it at more leisure;but wilt thou hear now how i did proceed?hor. i beseech you.ham. being thus benetted round with villains,ere i could make a prologue to my brains,they had begun the play. i sate me down,devis'd a new commission, wrote it fair:( i once did hold it as our statists do,a baseness to write fair; and labour'd muchhow to forget that learning; but, sir, nowit did me yeoman's service; ) wilt thou knowth' effect of what i wrote?hor. ay, good my lord.ham. an earnest conjuration from the king,as england was his faithful tributary,as love between them like the palm might flourish,as peace should still her wheaten garland wear,and stand a comma 'tween their amities,and many such like as's of great charge;that on the view and knowing these contents,without debasement further, more or less,he should the bearers put to sudden death,no shriving time allow'd.hor. how was this seal'd?ham. why ev'n in that was heaven ord'nant;i had my father's signet in my purse,which was the model of that danish seal:i folded the writ up in form of th' other,subscrib'd it, gave th' impression, plac'd it safely;the change was never known: now, the next daywas our seafight, and what to this was sequent,thou know'st already.hor. so, guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.ham. they are not near my conscience; their defeatdoth by their own insinuation grow:'tis dangerous when baser nature comesbetween the pass, and fell incensed pointsof mighty opposites.hor. why, what a king is this?ham. does it not, think'st thou, stand me now upon?he that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother,pop't in between th' election and my hopes,thrown out his angle for my proper life,and with such cozenage; is't not perfect conscience,to quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,to let this canker of our nature comein further evil?hor. it must be shortly known to him from england,what is the issue of the business there.ham. it will be short.the interim's mine, and a man's life's no morethan to say, one.but i am very sorry, good horatio,that to laertes i forgot my self;for by the image of my cause i seethe pourtraiture of his; i'll court his favoursbut sure the bravery of his grief did put meinto a towing passion.hor. peace, who comes here?osr. your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.ham. i humbly thank you, sir. dost know this waterfly?hor. no, my good lord.ham. thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a viceto know him: he hath much land, and fertile; let abeast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at theking's mess; 'tis a chough; but as i say, spaciousin the possession of dirt.osr. sweet lord, if your a lordship were at leisure,i should impart a thing to you from his majesty.ham. i will receive it with all diligence of spirit;put your bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head.osr. i thank your lordship, 'tis very hot.ham. no, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind isnortherly.osr. it is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.ham. methinks it is very sultry, and hot for mycomplexion.osr. exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry, as'twere, i cannot tell how;  my lord, his majestybid me signify to you, that he has laid a great wageron your head: sir, this is the matter—ham. i beseech you remember—osr. nay in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence laertesis at his weapon.ham. what's his weapon?osr. rapier and dagger.ham. that's two of his weapons; but well.osr. the king, sir, has wag'd with him six barbary horses, against the which he impon'd, as i takeit, six french rapiers and poniards, with their assigns,as girdle, hangers, or so: three of the carriages infaith are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts,most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.ham. what call you the carriages?osr. the carriages, sir, are the hangers.ham. the phrase would be more germane to thematter, if we could carry cannon by our sides; iwould it might be hangers 'till then. but on; sixbarbary horses, against six french swords, their assigns, and three liberalconceited carriages, that's thefrench bet against the danish; why is this impon'd,as you call it?osr. the king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes between you and him, he shall not exceed you threehits; he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it wouldcome to immediate tryal, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.ham. how if i answer no?osr. i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in tryal.ham. sir, i will walk here in the hall; if it pleasehis majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me;let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, andthe king hold his purpose; i will win for him if ican: if not, i'll gain nothing but my shame, and theodd hits.osr. shall i deliver you so?ham. to this effect, sir, after what flourish yournature will.ofr. i commend my duty to your lordship.ham. yours, yours; he does well to commend ithimself, there are no tongues else for's turn.hor. this lapwing runs away with the shell on hishead.ham. he did so with his dug before he suck'd it:thus has he (and many more of the same a breed thati know the drossy age dotes on) only got the tune ofthe time, and outward habit of encounter, a kind ofnesty collection, which carries them through andthrough the most fond and winnowed opinions; anddo but blow them to their tryals, the bubbles are out.lord. my lord, his majesty commended him to youby young osrick, who brings back to him, that youattend him in the hall; he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will takelonger time?ham. i am constant to my purposes, they followthe king's pleasure; if his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now or whensoever, provided it be so able as now.lord. the king and queen and all are coming down.ham. in happy time.lord. the queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to laertes, before you fall to play.ham. she well instructs me.hor. you will lose this wager, my lord.ham. i do not think so; since he went into france,i have been in continual practice; i shall win at theodds. but thou wouldst not think how ill all's hereabout my heart but it is no matter.hor. nay, good my lord.ham. it is but foolery; but it is such a kind ofmisgiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.hor. if your mind dislike any thing, obey it. iwill forestall their repair hither, and say you arenot fit.ham. not a whit, we defy augury; there's specialprovidence in the fall of a sparrow. if it be now,'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now:if it be not now, yet it will come; the readiness is all.since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is'tto leave betimes?king. come, hamlet, come, and take this handfrom me.ham. give me your pardon, sir, i've done youwrong,but pardon't, as you are a gentleman.this presence knows, and you must needs have heardhow i am punished with sore distraction.what i have donethat might your nature, honour and exceptionroughly awake, i here proclaim was madness:was't hamlet wrong'd laertes? never hamlet.if hamlet from himself be ta'en away,and when he's not himself, does wrong laertes,then hamlet do's it not; hamlet denies it:who does it then? his madness. if't be so,hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd,his madness is poor hamlet's enemy.let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil,free me so far in your most generous thoughts,that i have shot mine arrow o'er the house,and hurt my brother.laer. i am satisfied in nature,whose motive, in this case, should stir me mostto my revenge: but in my terms of honouri stand aloof, and will no reconcilement;'till by some elder matters of known honouri have a voice, and president of peaceto keep my name ungor'd. but till that time,i do receive your off'r'd love like love,and will not wrong it.ham. i embrace it freely,and will this brother's wager frankly play.give us the foils.laer. come, one for me.ham. i'll be your foil, laertes; in mine ignoranceyour skill shall like a star i'th' darkest nightstick fiery off, indeed.laer. you mock me, sir.ham. no, by this hand.king. give them the foils, young osric.hamlet, you know the wager.ham. well, my lord,your grace hath laid the odds o'th' weaker side.king. i do not fear it, i have seen you both:but since he's better'd, we have therefore odds.laer. this is too heavy, let me see another.ham. this likes me well; these foils have all a length.osr. ay, my good lord.king. set me the stoops of wine upon that table:if hamlet give the first, or second hit,or quit in answer of the third exchange,let all the battlements their ordinance fire.the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath,and in the cup an onyx shall he throw,richer than that which four successive kingsin denmark's crown have worn. give me the cups,and let the kettle to the trumpets speak,the trumpets to the cannoneer without,the cannons to the heav'ns, the heav'ns to earth.now the king drinks to hamlet. come, begin,and you the judges bear a wary eye.ham. come on, sir.laer. come, my lord.ham. one ————laer. no ————ham. judgementlaer. a hit, a very palpable hit.osric. well —— again ————king. stay, give me drink. hamlet, this pearl is thine,here's to thy health. give him the cup.ham. i'll play this bout first, let it by a while.come —— another hit —— what say you?laer. a touch, a touch, i do confess.king. our son shall win.queen. he's fat, and scant of breath.here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows,the queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet.ham. good madam ————king. gertrude, do not drink.queen. i will, my lord; i pray you pardon me.king. it is the poison'd cup, it is too late.ham. i dare not drink yet, madam, by and by.queen. come, let me wipe thy face.laer. i'll hit him now.king. i do not think't.laer. and yet it is almost against my conscience.ham. come, for the third, laertes, you but dally,i pray you pass with your best violence,i am afraid you make a wanton of me.laer. say you so? come on.osric. nothing neither way.laer. have at you now.king. part them, they are incens'd.ham. nay, come again ————osric. look to the queen there, ho!hor. they bleed on both sides. how is't, my lord?osric. how is't, laertes?laer. why, as a woodcock to my own springe, osrick.i’m justly kill’d with mine own treachery.ham. how does the queen?king. she swoons to see them bleed.queen. no, no, the drink, the drink ————oh my dear hamlet, the drink, the drink, ————i am poison'd ————  ham. oh villainy! hoe! let the door be lock'd:treachery! seek it out ————laer. it is here. hamlet, thou art slain,no medicine in the world can do thee good.in thee there is not half an hour of life;the treacherous instrument is in thy hand,unbated and envenom'd: the foul practicehath turn'd it self on me. lo, here i lye,never to rise again; thy mother's poison'd;i can no more ———— the king, the king's to blame.ham. the point envenom'd too?then venom to thy work.king. treason, treason.king. o yet defend me, friends, i am but hurt.ham. here thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned dane,drink off this potion: is d the onyx here?follow my mother.laer. he is justly serv'd.it is a poison temper'd by himself.exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet;mine and my father's death come not upon thee,nor thine on me!ham. heav'n make thee free of it, i follow thee.i am dead, horatio; wretched queen, adieu!you that look pale, and tremble at this chance,that are but mutes or audience to this act,had i but time, (as this fell sergeant deathis strict in his arrest) oh i could tell you ————but let it be ———— horatio, i am dead,thou liv'st, report me and my cause arightto the unsatisfied.hor. never believe it.i'm more an antique roman than a dane;here's yet some liquor left.ham. as th' art a man,give me the cup; let go, by heav'n i'll have't.oh good horatio, what a wounded name,things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me?if thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,absent thee from felicity a while,and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,to tell my tale.what warlike noise is this?osr. young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland,to the ambassadors of england givesthis warlike volley.ham. o, i die, horatio:the potent poison quite o'ergrows my spirit,i cannot live to hear the news from england.but i do prophesie th' election lightson fortinbras, he has my dying voice,so tell him, with th' occurrents more or less,which have solicited. —— the rest is silence.hor. now cracks a noble heart; goodnight, sweet prince;and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!why do's the drum come hither?fort. where is this fight?hor. what is it you would see?if ought of woe or wonder, cease your search.fort. this quarry cries on havock. oh proud death!what feast is tow'rd in thine † eternal cell,that thou so many princes at a shotso bloodily hast struck?amb. the fight is dismal,and our affairs from england come too late:the ears are senseless that should give us hearing;to tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,that rosincrosse and guildenstern are dead:where should we have our thanks?hor. not from his mouth,had it th' ability of life to thank you:he never gave command'ment for their death.but since so full upon this bloody question,you from the polack wars, and you from england,are here arriv'd; give order that these bodieshigh on a stage be placed to the view,and let me speak to th' yet unknowing world,how these things came about. so shall you hearof cruel, bloody, and unnatural acts,of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,and in this upshot, purposes mistook,fall'n on th' inventors heads. all this can itruly deliver.fort. let us haste to hear it,and call the nobless to the audience.for me, with sorrow, i embrace my fortune,i have some rights of memory in this kingdom,which now to claim, my vantage doth invite me.hor. of that i shall have also cause to speak,and from his mouth whose voice will draw no more:but let this same be presently perform'd,even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischanceon plots and errors happen.fort. let four captainsbear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;for he was likely, had he been put on,to have prov'd most royally. and for his passage,the soldiers musick, and the rites of warspeak loudly for him—take up the body: such a sight as thisbecomes the field, but here shews much amiss.go, bid the soldiers shoot.